What’s the Point?HOW SHOULD YOU INVEST?Ecclesiastes 11:1-6

(SERIES SLIDE)

Sometimes, we get something new, open the instructions, and they’re not that helpful. Or we read a book, or watch a video, or look at an article and it seems pretty irrelevant: When will I ever need that?

But other times, we recognize relevance quickly. Something goes to the heart of our doubts, concerns, frustrations. It’s refreshingly honest. It doesn’t pretend it’s all easy or try to tie up every loose end.

I hope you’re discovering that’s Ecc.

A few weeks ago, we looked at how Ecc talks about seasons and time, what is beyond time, we can tell that’s important. We need that.

Last week, we read in Ecc that we are meant to enjoy God’s good gifts. It’s a huge part of life, and we looked at how to deal with it, when they’re gone. We need that.

Today, we’re going to read from Ecc 11:1-6.

A few themes going on there, but a big one we’ll spend some time with today is investing. When you invest, you put resources (time or money) into something, hoping, expecting that there will be returns greater than what was originally put in. (vocabulary.com)

So, what investments are worth making?  It’s easy to go to money, but I’m not just talking about money, although that’s a part of it. But, how do you invest your energy, your time, your emotions, your relationships

You may even think there’s a certain age where you start to think about doing that. To think through investing we need to ask a question

WHAT WORLD DO YOU LIVE IN?

Can you even invest in the world we live in? We’ve been picking up clues from Ecc, that this world makes investing really difficult.

The world you often can’t predict (3)

If the clouds are full, they will pour out rain on the earth; whether a tree falls to the south or the north, the place where the tree falls, there it will lie.

Some things appear inevitable, even though they aren’t 100% predictable. This hits pretty close to home. Clouds will dump rain (timing, how much).

Other things seem so random. Trees falling are beyond your control. In the woods after a storm with lots of winds (trees are down, but it’s not uniform)

Truly, a lot of life defies our prediction (4)But, it’s also a world you regularly don’t quite understand

Just as you don’t know the path of the wind, or how bones develop in the womb of a pregnant woman, so also you don’t know the work of God who makes everything.

Even when you know the general big-picture things like Wind forecasts (each individual gust) – (4)

Basics of human reproduction/gestation/pregnancy (still boggles minds)

Even if you have some scientific knowledge, it’s still baffling. It’s meant to be.  Joe, Zach, Carl, Wayne – BECAUSE of the science they knew, they were less impressed in science as science, and really ended up doing science in awe of God.

We aren’t going to be able to explain every cause, every piece of data. That’s the world we live in.

It’s a world you definitely can’t control (6)

you don’t know [what] will succeed, whether one or the other, or if both of them will be equally good.

Can you really control the success/failure of every single thing (6)

Maybe this will work, maybe this won’t. Even with so many things we can get our arms or heads around, we still get reminded very often we aren’t in control. We’re not running the universe

The world we live in. Ecc is just filled with “things you don’t know, things that you can do nothing about” [Jeopardy category)

2 – you don’t know what disaster may happen on earth, 5 – you don’t know the path of the wind5 – you don’t know how bones develop in the womb of a pregnant woman6 – you don’t know which activity will succeed

T: but it is a world where, when we can’t predict, don’t understand and can’t control, the God who makes everything is still at work (5). Does that comfort you? It at least should humble you! God governs physics, pre-natal life, weather and atmospheric conditions, success/failure. So, this is the world we live in,

So, WHAT ARE YOU SUPPOSED TO DO? How are you told to live?

Here’s what’s the easiest, what comes the most natural. It’s to try to gain some sort of control.

In light of the world we’re living in, to deal with all the challenges and retain control, it might make sense to try to be all about hoarding/stockpiling (instead of any investment)

Hoard everything (so you can stay in control). Stockpile 7x what you need, actually 8x just to be on the safe side

Instead we hear…SEND/GIVE (1-2)

Send your bread on the surface of the water, for after many days you may find it. Give a portion to seven or even to eight, for you don’t know what disaster may happen on earth.

What is going on with the soggy bread analogy? It’s tough

Business – (1) Water/boats/shipping - pretty unpredictable, but go ahead and do it, or (2) Diversify your investment portfolio (portions)

Charity/Kindness - giving, assisting various people in need. Early Jewish rabbis often read it this way. Bread is something related to life and sharing, not so much exports. Keep giving, take care of people, be known for generosity. That’s where I am inclined.

Either way - don’t hoard, stockpile. It is time to send, to give, to invest

Here’s a plus –  It’s a good thing to do, even if it’s a longshot, and life’s a funny thing, good may come to you, even “accidentally.” [Not really a hint of karma, more just watching how life plays out.]

Here’s a negative – disaster may come to you, and this may serve as preparation for you.

So don’t hoard or stockpile, send/give.  But there’s another trap we might fall into. In light of the world we’re living in, it could make sense to wait for the absolute perfect conditions (before we invest)

One who watches the wind will not sow, and the one who looks at the clouds will not reap.

Maybe you’re a perfectionist, so you wait for the most perfect time for anything you do. There may be a “season” for everything, but that wasn’t meant to be paralyzing: “I just don’t know if this is the best hour/minute to sow. I just don’t know if this is the best hour/minute to reap. When in doubt, just don’t.”

The caricature is of someone who needs to be 100% certain when sowing so you can guarantee the perfect harvest. Paralyzing perfectionism, Hyper-introspection, Over-analyzing

What’s the action step? Look at verse 6 again. Sow! Get to work (6)

morning/evening – doesn’t mean work all day, non stop; it means whenever the opportunity arises. VS trying to find the exact best moment.

We’re getting the same message again and again: send, give, sow!

If we widened out Ecc, we might realistically say, “it may turn out good, there may be a disaster. Your days are fleeting, life will be over at some point.”

This can be such helpful advice on investing. Still, it leaves me wishing for more. It doesn’t sound promising. Sometimes, it works out. Sometimes, it doesn’t. You never know. There aren’t guarantees.

Remember when we started this book, we said that Ecc was written before Jesus, the wisest man that ever lived. God the Son in flesh.

Jesus comes, and quickly we see new dimensions to this conversation. First, Jesus teaches differently.

He gives parables (analogies and stories) of talents/workers and their investment of things. He speaks of the kingdom of God and it has implications in the future.

He reminds us that the kingdom of God is about relationships

wedding invitations, people are gathered, celebratingfather/son reconciliations, home is restoredtime invested in a search, a lost sheep comes back into the fold

activities done now may have a big impact in the future

when followers of Jesus realized they had invested a lot (and even gave up a lot) in following him. Was that a worthwhile investment? anyone who’s given up houses, lands, will be rewarded in full

a seed goes in the ground (essentially dies), but that is an investment

You lose your life for my sake (that’s an investment)

Jesus taught differently, but he also lived His life, and died differently.

Jesus didn’t come to be served, but TO SERVE, to invest His life for the good of others, to give his life to secure a future.

And we’re told in Hebrews 12:2 to run with endurance the race that lies before us, keeping our eyes on Jesus, the pioneer and perfecter of our faith. For the joy that lay before him, he endured the cross, despising the shame, and sat down at the right hand of the throne of God.

He invested his very life so that your faith would be authored and perfected. That brought him great joy. He was a happy investor.

Romans 5 says that by 1 death = many are righteous

By dying and then by rising, he guarantees the investment, brings many sons to glory, God finishes work He starts.

Is this good news to you? Have you personalized it? Have you submitted to who He is.

God’s gift of grace to you is the investment He’s made into your life. Your response is one of turning, relying, following.

That changes things for us as well. Now when we think of investment, our mindset is anchored by something beyond and something future

Grace-distributors – investment will yield things. God’s grace changes things permanently

Good news announcers – announcement will yield good returns

kingdom stewards/investors – things done FOR Him, in HIS name —> those are investments that last

Remember “Send / Give / Sow”

Remember Jesus sends – rescue mission, with gospel intentionality

“As the Father sent me, I am sending you.” We are witnesses of His good news, deliverance/freedom, recovery of life. We go out with His compassion. We go out with prayers (harvest), ready to bring people back home

Jesus tells us to give – with gospel intentionality

We lay up treasures in heaven. Give and it will be given to you. We give, pray and the one who sees us do those things secretly will reward us.

Jesus reminds us he is sowing, and we can join him. The word of God in people’s lives, distribute the good news, make good deposits

Despite all the unpredictability, or things we can’t control, our prayer is that we might see 30, 60, 100 fold return at times

In light of Jesus’ kingdom coming in his dying, rising, reigning, how will you Send, Give, Sow? In other words

WHAT KINDS OF INVESTMENTS WILL YOU MAKE?

This is a tough season to think about eternal investments. technology, culture, age, our flesh all seem to push us inward and very short term. Over time, has your mindset narrowed? Have you gotten lazy? Have you gotten selfish, turned inward? Jesus is calling us beyond our self-focus, and self-centeredness

We find it easy to invest in ourselves. I am not talking about your spiritual growth, your personal and professional growth.

How much are you going to invest in your appearance, status, how much approval others give you, comfortable, more powerful, fame/attention, acquiring things that will impress others

Are you going to live life viewing people as threats, $ sign above their head, can give you something you want? Is that your life’s calling?

Jesus sought out people, saw people, was moved with compassion. He saw a world of people that could grow, people that need love/attention, people that need a conversation, hurting, confused, isolated, lonely. Do you see that same world?

Where could you invest? What investments will you make?

Relationships / friendships where God could use you.

Basic care for others, their growth and maturity, their flourishing / thriving (becoming all God wants them to be)

some good work going forward ($)

Vocational or professional investment

Think about it

For the introvert – could you go deeper with a few

For the extrovert – are you staying on the surface (a million connections, friends)

Years where your house is full: little lives, little eyes/ears

I live by myself: work, friends, family

Strength is fading, capacity and opportunities are diminished. Are there  conversations, prayer, writing

Could you be hospitable, help, encourage, present, aware, love?

CONCLUSION: In light of the work of Jesus for you, the work of the Spirit in you, the future experience of the full dimensions of the kingdom of God awaiting you. Because you’ve received such a gift that you can invest…

Consider making it a priority to….

1. Ask the Lord to show you where you might be hoarding or stockpiling, wrestling with paralyzing perfectionism, low-grade, garden-variety selfishness.

2. Ask the Lord to help you to discern/find one daily investment of sending, giving, sowing (maybe nothing earth changing). Things we do daily change us; not so much legalism; maybe it will require sacrifice. There is nothing so life-giving, as dying to yourself, to serve others

3. (For some) Challenge you to consider a big investment. Moments of time where we’re tested. (rich young ruler). Something a little deeper

<><><><><>

3.16.2025    Brainerd  (Sunday AM)