ARE YOU IN?ALL WHO ARE THIRSTY, COME TO ME!JOHN 7:25-39

TITLE SLIDE

It can be a really noisy world. Not just the noise of a city, highway, train tracks, not even the noise of TV always on or earbuds always playing

Something always stirred up, people ramped up and talking about it. Our world feeds on controversies: Sports, music, politics, global events. Our buttons are pressed, and we add to the noise.

Often our heads and hearts are noisy. We’re stressed, we’re always on, we can’t take relaxing/boredom so we stew and the internal processor never shuts off.

John 7 really feels to me like a noisy passage, a noisy time in Jerusalem

people debating, arguing, murmuring, processing, pleading, demeaning comments made out of frustration and probably jealousy.

In the noise, people are around Jesus. Real people are close, and they land in different spots: the brand new, open to more but unclear, confused, and then stubbornly and actively resisting. All of the above.

In this passage, you notice, people aren’t talking TO Jesus, but lots of people are around Jesus. Good news is that Jesus is talking to PEOPLE. Good news is that Jesus is talking to US as well.

We’ll get a chance to clarify some really important things: How clear are you on some questions about Jesus?  There is a range of clarity. No one is a complete expert. But, if you are way off, you need to know. And if you’re a little bit off, you need to know.

The things that matter enough for him to raise his voice in a crowded Jerusalem and talk above the noise? How clear are we?

25Some of the people of Jerusalem were saying, “Isn’t this the man they are trying to kill? 26Yet, look, he’s speaking publicly and they’re saying nothing to him. Can it be true that the authorities know he is the Messiah? 27But we know where this man is from. When the Messiah comes, nobody will know where he is from.” 28As he was teaching in the temple, Jesus cried out, “You know me and you know where I am from. Yet I have not come on my own, but the one who sent me is true. You don’t know him; 29I know him because I am from him, and he sent me.” 30Then they tried to seize him. Yet no one laid a hand on him because his hour had not yet come. 31However, many from the crowd believed in him and said, “When the Messiah comes, he won’t perform more signs than this man has done, will he?”

This is a passages where Jesus speaks out (Go back to vs 28-29)

There’s a lot of irony in the back and forth about where Jesus is from – all this debate about Judea/Galilee, Jesus checks the box of being from Bethlehem, but the point is that he checks a bigger box (from the Father)

In all this, Jesus is kind enough to move toward us in our ignorance

As much as we learn from Jesus about how we’re supposed to do life, the values we’re supposed to have, the way we’re supposed to treat people, here Jesus has something so important on his mind…

Do we really know why the Father sent Jesus?  “the one who sent me”

Are you clear on why the Father sent Jesus? Jesus was sent on a REVEALING OPERATION

NOTE: You can figure out a lot of life-hacks just by observing or listening to people, how to use time more productively. You can’t understand the character and nature of God without God revealing himself to you.

No one has ever seen God (1:18) – a lot of separation and distance

Word became flesh, Glory of God came in human form, people see it

And in every human interaction that Jesus has, the Father is revealed

Teaching about God, commands He gave, prohibitions, blessings he pronounced, they are seeing God, we are seeing God

Jesus will talk about the Father sending him because you need a clear picture of who God is. Jesus is on a one of a kind revealing operation.

Why did the Father send Jesus – He’s also on a RESCUE OPERATION

Rebels who have twisted up their lives, not able to save themselves. We are victims, but we’re also spiritual criminals. We don’t do what we should. We leave undone what we should be doing. We know what’s right, we don’t do it. We know what’s wrong, we do it anyway. There are no winks, no sliding scales, no do-overs.

God saw us there. Could one identify with them, live in this world without sin? Only God the Son.

Jesus is sent by the Father to be the Savior of the world, atoning for our sins through sacrifice [shepherd laying down his life for the sheep]

Jesus will talk A LOT about the Father sending him. He is on a one-of-a-kind rescue operation.

Do we really know why the Father sent Jesus because what hangs in the balance is Do we really know the Father? Jesus is saying they didn’t.

To not know God is more than just saying to them “you missed a few aspects of theology. Valuable teaching and connections you could be making.” It’s saying, “You’re missing a relationship with HIM.”

You can sing, banter, quote Bible verses and speculate back and forth. But, you might miss actually knowing the Father. Yet, Jesus came so you WOULDN’T miss him.

We might’ve gathered God’s greatness (by the world), Omni’s (judge). But, Jesus gives a glimpse into what covenant love means to individuals

The idea of karma, scales (no), the concept of Grace (yes)

Personal heart of God toward sinners – him and her, and her, and her, and him, and you. God loves you.

You need that rescuer! The rescue comes by Hearing, Receiving, Believing in Jesus for everything He is will change you permanently. Life is set on a very different trajectory

Here is something that is terrible: some would’ve heard Jesus say these very words, and thought this was nonsense, others would’ve walked away thinking “is that it? I’m not that impressed.” For some, the noise of Jerusalem would’ve been louder than Jesus speaking.

The world is a pretty noisy place. How does what Jesus says situate in your life? Has the noise of home, work, hobbies, scrolling, college, retirement, dating, marriage drowned any of this out.

We keep reading because Jesus has more to say.

32The Pharisees heard the crowd murmuring these things about him, and so the chief priests and the Pharisees sent servants to arrest him. 33Then Jesus said, “I am only with you for a short time. Then I’m going to the one who sent me. 34You will look for me, but you will not find me; and where I am, you cannot come.” 35Then the Jews said to one another, “Where does he intend to go that we won’t find him? He doesn’t intend to go to the Jewish people dispersed among the Greeks and teach the Greeks, does he? 36What is this remark he made: ‘You will look for me, and you will not find me; and where I am, you cannot come’?”

I want to appreciate a very human moment for the disciples.

Hey. I am moving. When a friend drops that news it can be pretty devastating. We’re probably not going to see each other anymore.

For the crowds, there’s more irony – Jesus says that He is here for a short time (alarm bells), something would happen in short order, that would mean Jesus would not be physically with them AND he’s going somewhere else.

All sorts of speculation about Greek-speaking world, will Jesus go there (his disciples would with much good news). Still stumbling trying to figure out what Jesus’ angle is.

Yes, Jesus moves toward us in our ignorance but also our inability – You can’t go where I am going. Do we really know where Jesus was going?

Jesus is talking less about geography, more about spiritual dimensions

Do we really see the places where Jesus’ mission takes him to?

Cross – taking the wrath of God, bleeding, dying as a sacrificial offering to take away the sin of the world – we can’t go there

Buried – a completely innocent and perfectly righteous man seemingly being relegated into a cemetery as a memory – we can’t go there

Resurrected – new life, power as the conqueror over the world – on our own, we can’t go there

Ascended –  brought to a place of complete authority over the world, throne-scene – on our own, that’s off limits, we can’t excel to that

Great news – throne becomes a seat of grace, mediation of His kindness and grace for us.

Quick reminder – We’ll get ahead of ourselves a bit: You’re not going to walk that exact road, but He comes to us. Where I am, you will be. You are going to be united to him. Jesus is the Way/Truth/Life – no one goes to the Father.  You’re stuck in geography, I am bringing life-altering change.

It’s noisy in Jerusalem, and what Jesus said could be missed.

Career moves, personal struggles, family issues, silly frustrations

I fear it could be so noisy in your head and your heart, that even if you self-identify as a Christian, you might miss what Jesus is saying.

Jesus has made a commitment to do what is necessary to bring you to God, what is necessary to bring you life, forgiveness, healing, help

What do you do with that?

One of the frustrations of the disciples might actually be a challenge you have. We want to say it respectfully, “I wish Jesus would come out and connect all the dots.” Admittedly, it would be hard to know exactly what Jesus was doing.

It’s helpful here to take a step back and appreciate some things that were going on before we look at the last things Jesus said in this chapter. We talked about this being the FESTIVAL/FEAST OF SHELTERS

Road trip with camping and a festival – makeshift dwelling places (we wandered around, and God watched over us)

Another feature were the regular bonfires (burning bush, Sinai, fiery pillar to guide)

Observe something. We understand that something happened each of the 7 days, especially building to the last day

Each morning, a priest led a procession from the Temple in Jerusalem to the Pool of Siloam. The priest filled a golden pitcher with water  (music, singing, and Isaiah 12:3: “With joy you will draw water from the wells of salvation.”) The procession returned through the Water Gate to the Temple, the priest poured the water into a silver bowl on the corner of the bronze altar. On the seventh day, the priests circled the altar seven times (instead of once). The water-drawing preparation was so joyful that “he who has not seen the rejoicing at the Place of Water-Drawing has never seen joy in his life.”

Some deep symbolism

Past – God gave us water in the wilderness (Scriptures]

A connection to NOW/Present – Pouring water over an altar where sacrifices/offerings would be given

Future – a day, a time when water would come from Jerusalem, Temple would make everything lush, green; flood of good things (often like you see in movies when a curse is broken and things are restored)

Some connects are complicated, but not the one we’re about to read.

7:37–39 37On the last and most important day of the festival, Jesus stood up and cried out, “If anyone is thirsty, let him come to me and drink. 38The one who believes in me, as the Scripture has said, will have streams of living water flow from deep within him.” 39He said this about the Spirit. Those who believed in Jesus were going to receive the Spirit, for the Spirit had not yet been given because Jesus had not yet been glorified.

We’re going to spend more time especially looking more closely at v. 39 next week Lord-willing, and exactly what the Holy Spirit means for us, but today notice how intensely Jesus is speaking. Back to vv. 37-38.

He issues this wide invitation

“anyone” (men/women, rich/poor, religious/irreligious)anyone – it won’t stay in Jerusalem, Israel

There is only one qualification – come thirsty

comes for the sick, hungry, thirsty, lame, blind, broken, distant, oppressed, enslaved, guilty, shamed

you keep coming back because you’re thirsty

The invite is to “Come to me”

Not to look inside yourself and summon inner strengthNot “get their act together”Not “come to a winning formula”

PERSONAL – spending time with him, making yourself at home with him, receiving whatever He has on offer, accepting everything that He says about himself, you, and about you and Him

Let’s face it with some people you’re skeptical, something doesn’t quite click, so you hold back. It will not serve you well to do with him

Come and Drink the living water from Him.

Something active and passive about this

Believing – hard to describe that as a good deed, faith is a gift from God, but it’s also something you choose to do.

Some different ways to read this

The believer actually becomes a conduit of life. You have the Holy Spirit, he generates life, and now it comes from you and blesses others. The person who was thirsty now is activated

You were created for that purpose

It’s one thing to be holding a check that says you’re the recipient of charity (we didn’t deserve this)

This story goes further: this grace overflowed from us and through us, and now others experience life because of us. Question: Have you come to Jesus?

Conclusion: We’ve talked this morning quite a bit about the noise we experience in our world. But, we’ve also drilled down and at least tried to make sure we’re listening to what Jesus says.

How clear are you on where Jesus came from, why Jesus was sent?

How clear are you on what Jesus accomplished and where he ascended to, and what that means now?

You may have lots of knowledge about lots of things. Your eternity hangs in the balance of what you hear Jesus saying, and then based on what you’ve heard, who you’re trusting in.

Sit without some external noise, and ask the Lord’s voice to be louder than any others.

<><><><><>

6.22.2025    Brainerd  (Sunday AM)