ARE YOU IN?RESPONDING TO JESUSJOHN 8:48-59

(Series Title Slide)Intro: It’s not uncommon to see this on a Reality TV show: sometimes someone get more and more bothered and it turns into a full-on meltdown

Board meeting, cooking show, competition, Dinner Table

Frustration mounts, chain reaction – someone storming off, confrontation and threats

At times, it still catches me by surprise when that happens in Scripture, especially around Jesus. Jesus consistently speaks the truth with love and yet sometimes in Scripture, that triggers violent reactions against him. That happens at the cross and it actually is happening in John 8

We drop down in a chapter we’ve been looking at for a few weeks (grateful for Jackson/Josiah to navigate those passages for us as I was away)

Read 8:48-59 – You can’t help but notice the progression (actually digression). Things escalate quickly. Look at some key moments here.

Some of the leaders in Jerusalem – Jesus is seriously misguided and deserving to be called out

Samaritan (48) – Ethnic slur (and feeling justified), superstitiousHas a demon (48) – demon-possessed and feeling justifiedPoint where Jesus is dishonored (49) – despite me honoring my Father

Crossing more and more lines that shouldn’t be crossed

Who are you making yourself out to be (53)You are delusional and way off (57)

Desire for him to be completely eliminated – You’re so dangerous you shouldn’t live (59) – pick up stones, mob scene

Simplest to see the chaos through the lens of relationships

The relationship between Jesus and the Father.

I honor my Father (49). Imagine doing that 100% of the time!

I am not seeking glory (50) [posts, red carpets, center of attention]. I am not trying to glorify myself (54 – that’s a worthless pursuit)

My Father glorifies me (54).

That is remarkable statement, and I think they understood what it meant, because in Isaiah 42:8 we read “I am the Lord. That is my name, and I will not give my glory to another or my praise to idols.” Yet, Jesus’ clarity is unmistakable. The Father showers glory on Jesus.

I know the Father (55) intimately.

The Lord is great…his greatness is unsearchable. (Psalm 145:3). One is confidently saying, I know him!

Everything I do is in lock-step with the Father (keep his word) - (55)

My ways are not your ways, they are higher – Isaiah 55:8-9 [with me, it’s different – I always walk in his ways]

Why the anger? Jesus is telling them: My relationship with the Father is locked in. Your relationship with the Father is broken. I love him. You don’t love him with all your heart. You have a sense of pride, and external conformity. I always honor him from the heart. I know him. There’s distance between you and God. What Jesus is talking about is SIN. Sin when it is finished brings death. (regardless of your ethnic status, you need a mediator, reconciler, lamb to take away sin, need sin forgiven, need healing and wholeness and restoration). I will bring you to God. I will open the way for you to draw near

Here’s why I think they find Jesus so frustrating: They hear him sayThere is something completely different about me that changes everything for you. That isn’t arrogant for him to announce, it’s loving (to use Jn 1:14 language), He only always is full of grace and truth. He’s come from the Father to restore you to him. He’s the only one that could do that.

I wonder how that landed for them?

Maybe their life is rolling along. They feel good about themselves. They’ve told themselves they are okay. They can point to religious practices that tip their hat to God, little symbols of respect.

They’re the good kids in class, the teachers’ pet.

They’ve convinced themselves that they’re trying to do the best they can, sometimes even despite the hand they’ve been dealt, rising above it all.

Trying to be good people, succeeding more than they’re failing. Ranked at least average but probably a bit above average.

Someone comes and suggests (more than suggests) they have it all wrong, and they need a truckload of help. Jesus isn’t just trying to press buttons.

How does that land for you? FOR YOU: Safe enough distance (time, culture) means you probably have a hard time imagining yourself picking up stones, but I wonder if that would frustrate you?

not really anger, more apathy (dangerous place to be), could it be easier for you to ignore, not really get the message

if those realities are the same, then He still is the mediator we need. We’re distant from God, maybe externally okay (in a few ways), internally a wreck. We’re broken, rebels, in trouble. We need Jesus.

Jesus honors the Father, I want to do the same, help me, Jesus.Father glorifies Jesus, I want my life to glorify JesusJesus knows the Father, Jesus teach me, bring me closeJesus is in lock step with the Father, help me Jesus to be in step.

That means something for us! We come not with anger, apathy, humble hearts, saying, “Jesus, please, I desperately need you.”

That’s the relationship between Jesus and the Father, but notice also

The relationship between Jesus and Abraham

When Jesus says “through me, people will ‘not taste death’,” (52) people protest and they go to Abraham

A little bit like the US founding fathers a little extra (ethnically related to him); sense a deep generational connection

Abraham/prophets died, what are you talking about? You’ve found a way to cheat death! Could you be saying that you’re better than Abraham (53)

Jesus takes their reference to Abraham and goes even deeper. What Jesus is doing (the mission he is on) filled Abraham with joy

56 – Your father Abraham rejoiced to see my day; he saw it and was glad.”

There were so many promises that God had made to Abraham (Genesis 12, 15, 17, 22). God had promised to do so much.

Promises of worldwide blessings through a descendant

God establishing a covenant (binding agreement) to give unending favor to this family (and everyone brought into it)

Birth of a long awaited promised Son, Sacrifice of the innocent Son as an offering

With perspective, so many of these things seem to point us to Jesus.

Abraham is on the inside track of what God is doing, and he is very excited about what is coming. He put his hope in all of that. That was just a preview (thumbnail preview pics on documents). It was pointing to something greater, something infinitely fuller. That day is at hand.

JESUS – There is something completely different about me that changes everything for you.

All that Abraham had hoped for is happening. It’s being filled to the full.

They aren’t on board with that connection. “You’re crazy!” Jesus adds another layer…What Jesus is doing transcends Abraham

57 The Jews replied, “You aren’t fifty years old yet, and you’ve seen Abraham?”

They’re solving math problems, time questions

58 Jesus said to them, “Truly I tell you, before Abraham was, I am.”

Jesus is speaking of his significance – I AM. Connection to Moses

Then Moses asked God, “If I go to the Israelites and say to them, ‘The God of your ancestors has sent me to you,’ and they ask me, ‘What is his name?’ what should I tell them?” God replied to Moses, “I AM WHO I AM. This is what you are to say to the Israelites: I AM has sent me to you.” God also said to Moses, “Say this to the Israelites: The Lord, the God of your ancestors, the God of Abraham, the God of Isaac, and the God of Jacob, has sent me to you. This is my name forever; this is how I am to be remembered in every generation. (Exodus 3:13–15)

Connection to Abraham

After these events, the word of the Lord came to Abram in a vision: Do not be afraid, Abram. I am your shield; your reward will be very great. (Ge 15:1)

He also said to him, “I am the Lord who brought you from Ur of the Chaldeans to give you this land to possess.” (Genesis 15:7)

Jesus uses “I AM” language – we’ve seen this already, you will see it more in the rest of John.

This is such a big claim for Jesus to make. Several people are infuriated by this. They catch on to what Jesus is saying: There is something completely different about me that changes everything for you.

the blessing of the world hinges on methe everlasting covenant that God made is fulfilled in meGod’s favor on descendants flows through me

Without you, Jesus, we’re hopeless, helpless, without God, outsiders, in darkness, lost. Jesus is on the scene saying HOPE has arrived for you.

Are YOU landing there? This is one of those “Holy Ground moments.” Definitely not the moment you yawn and say “what’s for lunch.”

This is the one we’ve been waiting for [Isaiah 25:9]

“Heavens, sprinkle from above, and let the skies shower righteousness. Let the earth open up so that salvation will sprout and righteousness will spring up with it. I, the Lord, have created it. (Isaiah 45:8)

Seek him while he may be found [Isaiah 55:6]

The kingdom has arrived (Mark 1:15)

The One Abraham looked for has come. Don’t miss him!!

Which brings us to one more relationship, and it’s so, so critical

The relationship between Jesus and YOU

If you’re anything like me, I don’t imagine “let’s stone Jesus” is our first thought. In my mind, I am nowhere close to that. But, are you buying in?

Something potentially dangerous even for those who do identify with him

day after day with Jesus being an afterthought, not the main thing, exerting no controlling influence, no love for Him, no desire to submit to doing life HIS way.

Part of a crowd that had to get back home, back to work, back to the stuff that “mattered.” Could they have missed it? Could you?

maybe you’re tracking just enough for Jesus to be  – a mascot, a logo, a hood ornament for a self-help, achieve-your-dreams, be-nice religion

That won’t do. Jesus calls you to more

So what is the right relationship

51Truly I tell you, if anyone keeps my word, he will never see death.”

Never seeing death means more than some eternal fire insurance.

So, there is dying physically. You don’t breathe, your heart stops pumping blood, your earthly life is over. There is grief attached to this.

But, what about dying spiritually, becoming less and less, everything so stripped away, un-whole, unwell, disintegrating, turning from grace, turning inward, enslaved until you’re no longer who you’re meant to be.

Those who KEEP HIS WORD, that doesn’t happen to them.

Keeping his word ≠ following a 6 point mantra, or an honor code of some sort. Important to hear how the Apostle John writes about this.

The words of Jesus, the words that John shares can give a spiritual MRI. Create a detailed image of what’s going on inside.

Noisy, and made me a bit claustrophobic, there will be some quiet and some space to process what you need to. Holy Spirit, reveal the truth to us!

Jn 14:15 “If you love me, you will keep my commands.

Connected to loving God, not just mindless obedience

Jn 14:21 The one who has my commands and keeps them is the one who loves me. And the one who loves me will be loved by my Father. I also will love him and will reveal myself to him.”

Connected to being loved by Jesus, the Father, and revelation

Jn 14:23 Jesus answered, “If anyone loves me, he will keep my word. My Father will love him, and we will come to him and make our home with him.

God takes up residence in your life.

Jn 15:10 If you keep my commands you will remain in my love, just as I have kept my Father’s commands and remain in his love.

Connected to remaining in Jesus’ love

1 Jn 2:3 This is how we know that we know him: if we keep his commands.

This gives indicators to us that we KNOW him

1 Jn 2:5 But whoever keeps his word, truly in him the love of God is made complete. This is how we know we are in him:

God’s love fills everything up completely

1 Jn 3:24 The one who keeps his commands remains in him, and he in him. And the way we know that he remains in us is from the Spirit he has given us.

Sense of remaining in him, and God remaining in us

Re 1:3 Blessed is the one who reads aloud the words of this prophecy, and blessed are those who hear the words of this prophecy and keep what is written in it, because the time is near.

Read aloud, hear it, and you KEEP it, because an endgame is coming

Re 14:12 This calls for endurance from the saints, who keep God’s commands and their faith in Jesus.”

Life requires endurance, and part of that endurance is keeping the words, and keeping our faith

Re 22:7 “Look, I am coming soon! Blessed is the one who keeps the words of the prophecy of this book.”

Connected to the coming of Jesus

This is a relationship of remaining, making someone your home, loving, being loved, enduring

Big swings of life, or dull monotony. Ups and down, hot and cold, somewhere in between, life coming together, life falling apart

Are you in?

<><><><><>

7.27.2025    Brainerd  (Sunday AM)