What’s the Point?HOW DO WE REMEMBER DEATH?Ecclesiastes 9:1-6

We have been studying Ecc (series slide). We’ve seen that the writer regularly observes life and says the hard thing like no one else quite does, and you think about it and you have to admit, “He’s not wrong.” Several uncomfortable topics, and it doesn’t really tidy them up. According to chapter 12, the words in this book function like goads, they poke us.

One area that it pokes, and frankly pokes hard is when Ecc talks about DEATH. It’s in almost every chapter; Even when death is not explicitly discussed, it’s a conversation that is hovering (almost like a big cloud you’ll see during a thunderstorm).

Several people have noted that it’s really hard for our culture to even think that it’s good to talk about death. So, we often just don’t! But sometimes we can’t help it. Something punctures that bubble, and we have to face it

personal physical condition, a diagnosis turns out to be surprising, terrifying (you, someone you love)lose someone that matters, spend a while processing that awful lossage, time passes on

Often death actually doesn’t feel as close, yet sometimes it does, and when it does there are few things that can be so fearful or hard.

We’re going to talk about death. Ecc echoes a familiar message in the Bible. Death is a really bitter pill to swallow (some taste, smell is so strong – even if it isn’t bad, it’s just a lot, more than you want)

The Bible calls death an enemy, it’s pictured as a thief, an intruder

a really hard scene in the BIble – John 11, at the death of a friend, Jesus is weeping, and there is a strong emotional response

Navigate carefully here, a conversation like this one is tough, but hopefully it will be helpful. A little bit like hitting the rumble strips on a highway, disorienting, but it wakes us up and keeps us alert. We’re grateful.

Read Ecc 9:1-6

You read a theme more than once: One fate. And that one fate has an equalizing power that strips things back. Paint/Varnish Stripper. What’s really underneath. Let’s see that. Let’s deal with that.

5For the living know that they will die, but the dead don’t know anything. There is no longer a reward for them because the memory of them is forgotten. 6Their love, their hate, and their envy have already disappeared, and there is no longer a portion for them in all that is done under the sun.

It’s just over. That isn’t unlike verses we’ve read.

1:11 – There is no remembrance of those who came before; and of those who will come after there will also be no remembrance by those who follow them.

2:16 – For, just like the fool, there is no lasting remembrance of the wise, since in the days to come both will be forgotten.

Death has a way of stripping back your IDENTITY (who you are). Death says: you’re going to be forgotten. Time will move on, people will come after you (100 years from now, all new people).

What’s our identity, who we are at our core; death says, you won’t be remembered. That seems significant and it just seems pretty sad.

Some have pointed out that clarity about death can come from thinking about great-grandparents. Could you pick them out? What was so distinguishing about them? What was the main driver of their life? What was their crowning achievement? Were they faithful? What was their marriage like? Would they have really wanted to be remembered? Often we just have no idea. What does that mean for us?

Finding Your Roots – this is your flesh and blood [mysterious features, connections, traits; you didn’t know them…they never knew you – life’s mysterious, funny, sad all at the same time]

Thinking about death means you have to ask questions about your identity. You think long and hard about WHO I AM. What identity I am anchoring my life around? What settles my place? What does any of that look like in light of death?

Two things can be true: make a genuine difference, and you likely won’t be remembered for it. Is that okay?

Ecc reminds us: you know everyone dies, and you’re going to be forgotten (enemy) —> futility, hevel, vanity. On the surface, I find it’s hard to argue.

Death means there’s a stripping away of something else.

1:3 – What does a person gain for all his efforts that he labors at under the sun?2:22 – For what does a person get with all his work and all his efforts that he labors at under the sun?

Death strips away ACQUISITIONS (our achievements, accomplishments, stuff). Death says: you didn’t hold on to it in the end, did you.

The words get more pointed. We really don’t take anything.

3:20 20All are going to the same place; all come from dust, and all return to dust.

5:15–16 15As he came from his mother’s womb, so he will go again, naked as he came; he will take nothing for his efforts that he can carry in his hands. 16This too is a sickening tragedy: exactly as he comes, so he will go. What does the one gain who struggles for the wind?

ACQUISITION slide

We acquire so much. I was reading this week about death in connection to ESTATE SALES. What’s going on here? We accumulate this stuff, invest it with meaning. One day, we’re gone. Someone decides, they don’t need all this stuff and their stuff, so the things maybe you wanted to last, didn’t.

We just don’t think about it, do we. You know what’s more enjoyable: New car smell, breaking in shoes, delivery truck (yay, more stuff). Often we don’t need it.  We probably all could benefit from a dose of minimalism. This isn’t a message about that, because even minimal stuff can be too important to us.

I am gathering all this stuff up (accumulating, achieving, accomplishing)? Is my life a sum total of all that?

Maybe some of it says you really cared about people (people were in this home, borrowed these things, felt loved by you).

Some of the estate sale things may be unnecessary but are sweet and special (unique, enjoyed what God gave you, not in a wrong way). Piece of me has gotten a little sadder when I think about this.

An estate sale might reveal a dark side – does it say anything about me that’s concerning (too much, had an unhealthy grip, mattered to you more than people, priorities out of whack, say something about grudges, selfishness)

In the end death says, one day, “it’s all gone”—> futility, hevel, vanity

Death strips something else. You can live a really long time. But eventually you’re done. End of all mankind

7:2 2It is better to go to a house of mourning than to go to a house of feasting, since that is the end of all mankind, and the living should take it to heart.

9:5 5For the living know that they will die, but the dead don’t know anything. There is no longer a reward for them because the memory of them is forgotten.

Such Brutal Honesty. The FUTURE is stripped. Death says: at some point, you don’t get another day to plan or execute your plan

We make plans: Summer vacation, every fall, we try to…; holidays – this year is when we _____.

But, when we’re honest w/ourselves, we realize that some projects will go unfinished, some books never read, some plans never executed. Something about that strikes me as really sad.

What can you absolutely guarantee going on and on? Not much.

If everything here comes to a grinding halt, things stop, then what’s on the calendar, then what comes next. Nothing really. Ecc beats the drum again —> futility, hevel, vanity

Ecc is just relentless. It’s so honest about what death does. No wonder even in the NT, the work of Jesus isn’t all about shooting us some good vibes, manifesting some positive energy; from Jesus we hear about the ugliness of death. And yet, there’s more to this.

Remember Jesus endures this sting of death. Jesus, God the Son, eternally worshipped, now experiences the enemy of death, not from a distance.

Hebrews 2:9 9we see Jesus—made lower than the angels for a short time so that by God’s grace he might taste death for everyone—crowned with glory and honor because he suffered death.

identity – he “claimed” to be king, he was mocked. He’s dead. Hours later, buried, the grave, it’s not even his. The people who had bought in say, “we thought he was the one.”

acquisitions/stuff – he said, “I don’t have a place to lay my head,” even his robe, that’s gambled on at the cross (he won’t be needing it anymore). He dies with nothing. Death does its work.

future – guess he can’t really save himself. The people who executed him are worried about his followers making something up, but they’re not concerned about his future. His disciples aren’t finding hope for the future (strength for today, bright hope for tomorrow). Death is devastating

On Good Friday, death does its awful work. Jesus tasted death for every person: Faces the sting/enemy, drinks the bitter cup, deals with devastating, dark, finality. Jesus lives every harsh reality of death that Ecc pushed us to face.

But, Scripture doesn’t stop there. So, one writer has called Ecc “the most striking messianic prophecy that the OT has to offer” by letting us know how bad things are. 1 Cor. 15 says we are really stuck if all we have is a dead Jesus. If Jesus isn’t risen, your faith is futile. You’re stuck in your sins.

Something happened that changed everything. Jesus physically rises from the dead, and in doing that he systematically destroys death and all its destruction. After Jesus dies and then rises, it’s not just a memory of Jesus that lingers, but Jesus as a person.

Think about the description that we read in Revelation. Some just see symbols, codes, numbers, ciphers. You have to see Risen Jesus.

This identity that had been stripped away – King of Kings, Lord of Lords, lion/lamb, name which is above every other name

an identity never taken away, death lost; actually WHO HE IS endures

All his stuff had been stripped away – now he has a crown, scepter, robe dipped in blood – the heavens are his, the earth is just his footrest, all things in heaven and on earth have been given to him. the kingdoms of this world have become the kingdoms of our God, and of His Christ

not taken away, death lost; actually WHAT HE POSSESSES endures

The future had been stripped away – now he shall reign forever and ever; the one who was, is and is to come; the first and the last

Old heavens/earth pass away, new heavens and new earth never end. Death is no more. Actually, his eternal FUTURE is 100% certain.

Everything that I have taught about Jesus I believe to the core of my being, and so does this church. Still, you may be saying, “that’s beautiful. I get that about Jesus, but I am dealing with the sting and pain of death.” I have so many tough questions. I feel so empty, so much loss. A piece of me died when ___ died.   You might be in the best position to understand why Paul said my goal is to know Jesus and the POWER OF HIS RISING.

Death blows so much up. We face our mortality, we carry deep loss and grief, hurts, disoriented, struggling, what does the rising of Jesus have to do with me?

The gospel doesn’t whisper here. It’s like the billboard you can’t ignore, the announcement over the loudspeaker that gets everyone’s attention. What that means for us

Hebrews 2:14–15 14Jesus shared in [flesh and blood], so that through his death he might destroy the one holding the power of death—that is, the devil— 15and free those who were held in slavery all their lives by the fear of death.

US – those who have wrapped our lives around Jesus. Those who know we can’t rely on ourselves. Those who know we’ve been complicit in rebellion against God, and faced up to the facts that sin, pain, death are too strong for us to defeat. Believe in everything that’s said in the Scriptures about Jesus. Rest wholly on that.

For you…Can we talk about WHO YOU ARE, how deeply loved you are? Because Jesus is alive, our identity is secured (yes, our great grandkids, our great nephews and nieces may not know us) – united to Him (Rom 6), our new name/identity is written down which doesn’t wipe out who we are, but it says more: we’re his, known by him (Gal 4:9), dwelling place of His Spirit, made to be his eternal sons/daughters, redeemed permanently. This is who we are in Jesus. Death will not have the final word about our identity

We spoke of STUFF: what you have acquired – your life doesn’t consist in the abundance of things you possess (Luke 12:15); your life is hidden with Christ in God (Col 3:3). How deeply Jesus loves you.

12 year old makes a decision about how she will love a friend – treasure laid up (something bigger, better, more in the new heavens)

55 year old perseveres, suffers well in some aspect of his life for the Lord – treasure laid up (not lost, not decaying; eternal weight of glory is being prepared)

30 year old decides it’s not all about her, and so she loves God with all her heart and her neighbor (makes some important investments).

Moses turned down what Egypt offered because there was a greater reward – communion with God. There are just several things that can’t be put up for an estate sale.

Your FUTURE (what’s next) is so secure – we don’t just survive but your future means we will reign with God. Our lives, and God’s work in us are sealed. His work is brought to completion, we’re made perfect, and eternal life is just getting started. Nothing is cut off too soon. You will glorify God.

Yes, when this flesh and heart shall fail, And mortal life shall cease,I shall possess, within the veil, A life of joy and peace. [John Newton]

Can we think about the dozens of ways sin has messed things up?

Instead of this decaying sinful flesh – glorified bodies  The Devil and hosts of evil forces – lake of fireDeath & everything that’s not the way it’s supposed to be – now it’s been defeated by life

The line from Tolkien – Is everything sad going to come untrue? What’s happened to the world?

CONCLUSION: This hasn’t been hellfire and brimstone, but I am guessing the subject still could sting a bit. My prayer wasn’t to be reckless with such a sensitive subject. What do you do with death? How do you prepare? What hope do you have?

What it can’t be is say this quick prayer, and you get your get out of hell free card. You know that doesn’t pass the smell test.

But, you’ve heard about your eternal relationship with Jesus. Being his possession, brought into his family. Your identity, future wrapped up in Him and his glory.

TODAY is the day of salvation, doubts don’t need to hold you back, today is the day you come home, where it means more to you than anything else, than ever before. Today is the day you remember death, and it actually brings life. Whoever calls on the name of the Lord will be saved.

[8:30] The Lord Jesus brought all this together when he instructed his disciples about how they should remember him

Take this bread/cup – death, body broken, blood runs out, his heart stops beating

New covenant, forgiveness of sins, atonement, mercy comes

We will do this again someday when I come again for you.

<><><><><>

3.23.2025    Brainerd  (Sunday AM)