NOT A STRAIGHT LINECONNECTING THE DOTSGENESIS 45:1-46:7

INTRO: As a kid did you ever do the “connect-the-dots” worksheets?  [If you didn’t I am sorry you were deprived of that growing up.]

Most of the time they are numbered. As you connect one after another, something emerges, something that draws a picture

I guess there could be a way where you connect random dots and nothing is coherent (no patterns, no pictures), but that would be doing it wrong.

A lot of life is how you connect dots. We all do this. We take dots: different events, seasons, jobs, moves, people, turning points, and we connect them in a certain way. We say “this lead to that.” Or “this was a lot like that.” We begin to see a picture, or patterns or a story. It’s part of being human. Do you get what I mean?

Life is high stakes, not child’s play. Counselors, therapists, social workers, teachers live a lot in the space of helping people connect dots, but actually all of us do this to some degree

How you connect dots from your past plays a major role in your present and how you see the future.

We’ve been laying out a series of dots for Joseph’s life which we’ve described as NOT A STRAIGHT LINE. Scripture doesn’t tell us every detail

Dot of growing up in a dysfunctional family with a dozen siblings, where you’re dad and mom’s favorite (which sounds great until everyone hates you)

Dot of having the most traumatic experience caused by your own brothers/family of being trafficked as a teenager (taken to a scary world, lose all family connections, new culture, maximum vulnerability)

Dot of finding yourself successful as a slave, growing level of trust

Dot of being falsely accused, convicted and punished for doing the right thing. Joseph had lots of dots.

Dot of after all that, being forgotten, left in prison by someone who should’ve remembered

Dot of being remembered in a series of events that propels you to the most success imaginable —> #2 position in a world empire, in charge of keeping the country fed and alive during a famine

Dot of recognizing your brothers who’ve come for food, but them not recognizing you.

Lots of different ways you can connect those dots. Let’s pay attention to how Joseph connects them.

We pick up in Gen. 45 right as Joseph has been in an intense conversation with his brother Judah. He’s finally going to reveal himself to his brothers.

1Joseph could no longer keep his composure in front of all his attendants, so he called out, “Send everyone away from me!” No one was with him when he revealed his identity to his brothers. 2But he wept so loudly that the Egyptians heard it, and also Pharaoh’s household heard it. 3Joseph said to his brothers, “I am Joseph! Is my father still living?” But they could not answer him because they were terrified in his presence. 4Then Joseph said to his brothers, “Please, come near me,” and they came near. “I am Joseph, your brother,” he said, “the one you sold into Egypt.

If you’re the brothers, what’s going on in your head? 1000 little clues click. He asked about dad and our younger brother. This was a test.

But, quickly it goes back…Joseph crying in a pit. 2 decades of guilt. I can only begin to grab a few threads of thought and emotion that would have gone into the revelation that Joseph is alive.

5And now don’t be grieved or angry with yourselves for selling me here, because God sent me ahead of you to preserve life. 6For the famine has been in the land these two years, and there will be five more years without plowing or harvesting. 7God sent me ahead of you to establish you as a remnant within the land and to keep you alive by a great deliverance. 8Therefore it was not you who sent me here, but God. He has made me a father to Pharaoh, lord of his entire household, and ruler over all the land of Egypt. 9“Return quickly to my father and say to him, ‘This is what your son Joseph says: “God has made me lord of all Egypt. Come down to me without delay. 10You can settle in the land of Goshen and be near me—you, your children, and your grandchildren, your flocks, your herds, and all you have. 11There I will sustain you, for there will be five more years of famine. Otherwise, you, your household, and everything you have will become destitute.” ’ 12Look! Your eyes and the eyes of my brother Benjamin can see that I’m the one speaking to you. 13Tell my father about all my glory in Egypt and about all you have seen. And bring my father here quickly.” 14Then Joseph threw his arms around his brother Benjamin and wept, and Benjamin wept on his shoulder. 15Joseph kissed each of his brothers as he wept, and afterward his brothers talked with him.

So many things are special

“Come near to me.” All the distance of bad decisions closed in a moment by Joseph’s choice. Embrace that signaled something really different about Joseph

The deep care Joseph had for generations (you, your kids, your grandkids) is significant.

But what stands out to me the most is the way Joseph interpreted his story, or if I can say it this way, how Joseph connected the dots.

Listen to Joseph talk

God sent me here ahead of you to preserve life (5)

God sent me ahead of you to establish you as a remnant within the land, and to keep you alive by a great deliverance. (7)

So it was not you who sent me here, but God. (8)

He has made me a father to Pharaoh, and lord of his entire household and ruler over all the land of Egypt. (8)

Tell dad…God has made me lord of all Egypt. (9)

What’s powerful is they all knew exactly what went down, who did what and when, still Joseph says, “God.” The subject of the sentences is God. God actively directing and orchestrating, and he does it through real decisions and choices that humans make. We’re not pawns or robots. Nothing is mechanical here. It is human and real, and God is at work.

When it comes to connecting the dots, HOW WE INTERPRET (MAKES SENSE) of all the connections matters

Joseph interpreted God working for good.

God sent me here is a story of pain. Jospeh sold. Anguish, doubts, loneliness, disconnectedness. There is a certain way you could interpret those things very differently in your mind.

God was preserving your life is Joseph acknowledging that on the worst day of my life, God was on a life-saving mission. Such a strange way, it was YOUR life he was saving. Preserve a remnant (from OUR family), holding us together.

God made me a father to Pharaoh (and I never would’ve been there if it hadn’t been for Potiphar’s wife)

Joseph plays it out: If this hadn’t happened, then that wouldn’t, then this wouldn’t. And he interprets the connections.

God lifts up. God orders and arranges. God decided to take care of your kids, grandkids, great-grandkids. He put me in the place to do it. You will have land, that helps your children's children.

Joseph doesn’t interpret this as his own personal achievements or just mind-blowing perseverance (although there was a lot of that).

Here’s the truth: You have a story. And you interpret don’t you?

You make connections with the year I went through this, the cancer, the new friend, the marriage, tumor, the birth of kids, financial loss, the church situation, the pain, the unexpected gift, the divorce, Covid, the move, the job loss, the success, the dementia, the joy, the infertility, the promotion, the relationship, the breakup.

How do we connect the dots? What was going on. How do we interpret? We have things happen to us.

What did that do to me? Where was God in this? Is this a story of grace, or if I can be blunt, is it one sorry story about how everyone and everything has conspired to do you in?

There will be problems that we encounter. The mistakes, the poor decisions. No excuses, but God can work even through sin.

There will be breaks that we seem to catch – lucky, earned, gift from God, test from God. Do you read them that way.

So, as you interpret and put a few things together with Joseph in mind, it can be helpful, because we don’t have to…

pretend like wrong things weren't done [how do we interpret]pretend that people aren't responsible, aren’t lingering harmful effects of tragedies

Positively, we see how God gave us strength, gifts, success, positions, friends

I am not saying we will know it all and have it figured out, but we won’t incorrectly assume God’s distant or powerless. We won’t incorrectly assume God’s cruel and our suffering is something he checks out on.

I have this friend who when I talk to him will regularly say, “Wouldn’t it be just like God to set this thing in motion years ago, so that you could _____.”

In a few moments, I am going to ask you to do something with that, so hold that thought as we keep reading

16When the news reached Pharaoh’s palace, “Joseph’s brothers have come,” Pharaoh and his servants were pleased. 17Pharaoh said to Joseph, “Tell your brothers, ‘Do this: Load your animals and go on back to the land of Canaan. 18Get your father and your families, and come back to me. I will give you the best of the land of Egypt, and you can eat from the richness of the land.’ 19You are also commanded to tell them, ‘Do this: Take wagons from the land of Egypt for your dependents and your wives and bring your father here. 20Do not be concerned about your belongings, for the best of all the land of Egypt is yours.’ ” 21The sons of Israel did this. Joseph gave them wagons as Pharaoh had commanded, and he gave them provisions for the journey. 22He gave each of the brothers changes of clothes, but he gave Benjamin three hundred pieces of silver and five changes of clothes. 23He sent his father the following: ten donkeys carrying the best products of Egypt and ten female donkeys carrying grain, food, and provisions for his father on the journey. 24So Joseph sent his brothers on their way, and as they were leaving, he said to them, “Don’t argue on the way.” 25So they went up from Egypt and came to their father Jacob in the land of Canaan. 26They said, “Joseph is still alive, and he is ruler over all the land of Egypt!” Jacob was stunned, for he did not believe them. 27But when they told Jacob all that Joseph had said to them, and when he saw the wagons that Joseph had sent to transport him, the spirit of their father Jacob revived. 28Then Israel said, “Enough! My son Joseph is still alive. I will go to see him before I die.”

Again, we can only speculate:

Why does Jospeh tell them not to argue?

How did they explain their decades-old deceit to dad? To their kids? How did they move on from it?

What’s going on in each of their heads/hearts? What really is going to happen? What does it look like to leave everything behind, resettle in a different world.

Let’s track with Jacob for a few more verses.

1So Israel took his journey with all that he had and came to Beersheba, and offered sacrifices to the God of his father Isaac.

It’s not just Joseph where I would like to connect some dots. But, I actually find some dot-connecting for Jacob as well.

He is headed to Egypt, and stops about 25 miles into his trip at Beersheba (not because they had a good KOA, or Holiday Inn Express)

It was intentional that he stopped there. It’s significant that it’s recorded. Let me connect some dots with Beersheba. It would’ve been a very meaningful place to his grandpa Abraham, and his dad, Isaac

Genesis 21:33 In Beersheba, Abraham called on the name of the Lord, the Everlasting God.

Gen 22 – Do you remember the scene where Abraham went up to the mountain to sacrifice Isaac. When Abraham and Isaac come down from that mountain, they go to Beersheba.

Gen 26 – Isaac has a deep encounter with God at Beersheba – the Lord appears and speaks “I am the God of your father Abraham. Do not be afraid, for I am with you. I will bless you and multiply your offspring because of my servant Abraham.” So he built an altar there, called on the name of the Lord, and pitched his tent there..

It seems like a big portion of Jacob’s life was also lived in Beersheba. Jacob takes advantage of his brother Esau, deceives his dad. There’s a threat on his life from his brother so he leaves from Beersheba.

Beersheba is a place of lots of events/dots that he would remember. Now, I think he makes an intentional stop there one more time and he offers sacrifices to the God of his father Isaac

But there are even more things that are connecting:

2That night God spoke to Israel in a vision: “Jacob, Jacob!” he said. And Jacob replied, “Here I am.” 3God said, “I am God, the God of your father. Do not be afraid to go down to Egypt, for I will make you into a great nation there. 4I will go down with you to Egypt, and I will also bring you back. Joseph will close your eyes when you die.” 5Jacob left Beer-sheba. The sons of Israel took their father Jacob in the wagons Pharaoh had sent to carry him, along with their dependents and their wives. 6They also took their cattle and possessions they had acquired in the land of Canaan. Then Jacob and all his offspring with him came to Egypt. 7His sons and grandsons, his daughters and granddaughters, indeed all his offspring, he brought with him to Egypt.

At this very important moment, some very important things are being remembered. While he is at Beersheba, Israel/Jacob receives a confirming vision, and this would take him back as well.

I am the God of your father, I keep my promises – they were big and I meant every word of them. This is what a covenant is all about. Promises of faithful love, no sacrifice he won’t make, no power he won’t exert to keep our souls from being lost

Don’t be afraid – There is a future for you/your people – this isn’t the end of the line, you are headed toward something better

I am going with you – you aren’t flying solo. Continual presence. Even when your life is over, my plan is just starting.

It was good for Jacob to be reminded of God‘s work in the past as he stepped into a very new arena.

I believe that there are some dots that you need to come back to…

As we connect the dots, WHAT WE REHEARSE (regularly come back to) really matters

You are beginning to recognize milestones and your seeing your life take shape. It’s when interpretation of some dots turns into a much bigger story. It is really good for our soul when we rehearse what God has been doing. When we remind ourselves of all the ways he has been at work.

So, for Jacob and this family, Beersheba, promises, a great nation, I am your God, I will be with you. I wonder if that has a centering effect on Jacob, as he prepares for yet another major change in his life. The past stabilized him: altars, sacrifices, God’s presence, God’s promises.

What are the big dots for you? What do you rehearse and tell yourself in your heart/mind? Are they encounters with God, or is he absent?

You realized he really is in charge, and you don’t do things His wayHe really does love you, and that is exactly what you needYour sin separates you from God, and Jesus came to reconcileYou really are headed to death, and you need a resurrected SaviorHe really can transform you from the inside, and you’ve been looking for that. You really do want him to be everything

Your encounter with that, or when it reignited, or when you came to a desperate situation and he provided, season of lots of growth, or a difficult time and he comforted. It’s good for you to rehearse your story (even a generational story).

So, when you get really tense, really uncertain, anxious, there are things you rehearse: God has made his covenant love and faithfulness crystal clear. I am His, and He is mine.

You’re in the middle of a disorienting season, struggle to find God’s good hand (due to a lot of tough life), you’re giving a lot, feel hurt and wounded, things are clicking, wisdom for the next decision – will God give it to you?

You review some milestones, some encounters, and you realize that while your experiences may change, God is the same. So you find a way to take your next step, step after that, then the next one

CONCLUSION

You’ve thought about Joseph and we’ve talked about Jacob, but what about your life. Many of you are so busy that you likely don’t have time for a full life review. Could you start with a couple of the big dots.

Rehearse the dangers, toils, snares. Name them.

Rehearse the mountain tops, joys, encounters, deliverance

What connections do you make, and how do you make sense of them? Can you see God at work in them?

Could you try to write them down, talk with a friend (we need help in connecting dots)

how are you interpreting – God present, conspicuously absent, God being good (not so good), things resolved, unresolved

One disappointment after another vs. painful, and yet gracious;

not what you would’ve chosen, but grace to realize it’s been better

do you rehearse what God has done for you, how he saved you, how he brought you through, how he was good to you.

<><><><><>

9.28.2025    Brainerd  (Sunday AM)