What’s the Point?HOW DO YOU RECEIVE A GIFT?Selected Scriptures in Ecclesiastes

(SERIES SLIDE)

Would you consider yourself a negative or positive person? Would OTHERS consider you as a positive or negative person? I’ve found that people who tend to be more negative appreciate this book a little more.

Ecc has this undertow – a pull, beautiful music with a minor key [labor, struggle, toil, futility, death]

For all the words that seem negative (vanity, empty, futility, meaningless) in Ecc, multiple times you hear a very different kind of theme.

2:24–25 – There is nothing better for a person than to eat, drink, and enjoy his work. I have seen that even this is from God’s hand, 25because who can eat and who can enjoy life apart from him?

3:12 – I know that there is nothing better for them than to rejoice and enjoy the good life.

3:22 – I have seen that there is nothing better than for a person to enjoy his activities because that is his reward. For who can enable him to see what will happen after he dies?

5:18–20 – Here is what I have seen to be good: It is appropriate to eat, drink, and experience good in all the labor one does under the sun during the few days of his life God has given him, because that is his reward. 19Furthermore, everyone to whom God has given riches and wealth, he has also allowed him to enjoy them, take his reward, and rejoice in his labor. This is a gift of God, 20for he does not often consider the days of his life because God keeps him occupied with the joy of his heart.

9:7–10 – 7Go, eat your bread with pleasure, and drink your wine with a cheerful heart, for God has already accepted your works. 8Let your clothes be white all the time, and never let oil be lacking on your head. 9Enjoy life with the wife you love all the days of your fleeting life, which has been given to you under the sun, all your fleeting days. For that is your portion in life and in your struggle under the sun. Whatever your hands find to do, do with all your strength, because there is no work, planning, knowledge, or wisdom in Sheol where you are going.

Those verses will guide our time today, and the message is clear: eat, drink, enjoy your work, enjoy life, rejoice, enjoy the good life, enjoy your activities. This is your “reward” from God, other translations say “lot” or “inheritance.” This is what God has given. It is his gift.

But Ecc comes with an asterisk, or a footnote. Your days are fleeting, you will die, life has limits, nothing lasts forever.

So what do we do with this? Even if you’re not a Christian, you swim in these same waters. You have to process all this in ways too, don’t you?

Absolute DESPAIR - can’t enjoy – nothing good, no point/goal. Ecc can almost be morbid with all the talk of vanity, futility, meaninglessness. Life is really bitter, and it’s devastating. Maybe you’re there. I am so, so sorry.

Frustrated CYNICISM – there’s a catch – some may experience some of the good life (but it will be taken away or blow up in your face), it’s easy to become really skeptical of any good point or higher goal [always running in the background in Ecc – vanity, meaninglessness, futility

INDULGE without asking many questions – dive in - as good as it will get, make it everything, the whole point, the whole goal (whatever financial or genetic lottery you win, get all you can out of it)

We could have a lot of perspectives. But what if you’re a Christian? How do you hear things like eat, drink, enjoy, experience good, have pleasure. Instinctively, it seems like we need some guardrails, there actually might be a strong inclination to pump the breaks hard

RESISTING – you want to live on a “higher plane” – earthly things not that good [pretty suspicious mindset, vanity, futile, meaningless], so you can enjoy things a little bit, but really the only good is bible reading, prayer, giving money away, church things. Feels like some binary choices.

fulfilled in work, when you should be doing church thingsshould you go see a movie, or go to a concert; or pray morehow much should you spend on birthday meal, give money to the Lordtake a vacation, read your Bible

ESCAPING (can’t wait to get out of here with all of this vanity, futility). Earthly things are not that good, you may enjoy some things (but remember Solomon way overdid it and look how that turned out) so I will wait for all the good things, one day everything will be better, so just hold off until then

Here’s my issue with all of the above: It doesn’t do justice to Ecclesiastes AND it just doesn’t do justice to the rest of the Bible. Ecc might help you pour a new foundation. I believe Ecc has been pushing for a new mindset.

Life isn’t just about trying to make a profit (that’ll regularly disappoint), but we are meant to see life as a GIFT from God for us. Gift, not gain.

This is some hard stuff, but I think if we can really understand this teaching, it may be like the person who first gets some new glasses. They see a sharpness like they’ve never seen before.

I want you to imagine a scenario: Imagine Parent-Child, Friend to friend: “I am giving you this amazing gift/experience.” What do you do with that?

This can go in a few directions: this is no good (despair & cynicism); this is no good (resist & escape)

But, if the gift is left unopened, or not touched or not experienced, and it hasn’t brought one smile to your face or any satisfaction to your soul. No one would say that’s what a giver has in mind.

I want you to hold that. Let’s learn some lessons about how we should receive God’s gifts in this life. Ecc is teaching…

Lesson #1 - God is a good giver, so enjoy what he’s given to you.

There’s an internal impulse. Don’t we need to say more (give some qualifications). When we say, “Just enjoy what He’s given…”

We need to have out-of-bounds discussions (don’t enjoy those)

We need to have priorities discussions. We can be deceived by things and they can mean too much.

We need to have overdoing discussions. (maxed out, keeping up with people, gambling addictions). We can be really self-centered. We buy things we don't need with money we don't have to impress people we don't like. Will Rogers and Dave Ramsey

So, all of the guardrails have their place, but I have a different target today.

If God didn’t want you to have good gifts, you wouldn’t have them.

If “enjoying life” was off the menu, why would see Jesus enjoying so many things? Why would we see him in…

Matthew 11:19 19The Son of Man came eating and drinking, and they say, ‘Look, a glutton and a drunkard, a friend of tax collectors and sinners!’

Think about how much he enjoyed life, think about his relational capacity for having friends in his life. Did he not eat, drink, work, enjoy good times?

Jesus recognized that the Father is a good giver, and so He enjoyed what He gave to Him.

Think about it: God made eating pleasurable (not just functional), and he made drinking a beverage enjoyable, and God made work to be fulfilling and a means of provision.

2:24  this is from God’s hand5:18 – God gives life, riches/wealth. It’s the gift of God9:7 – God accepts our activities

So many basic things for every human, and even though we know that the fall has ruined so much, God encoded them to be pleasurable. Enjoy them.

And so many of God’s good gifts are done with people. Enough to think through and realize that if I am looking at all the gifts, and I don’t see people, then I am probably living a pretty self-absorbed life.

Another door that this can unlock is that over time, you can actually increase the things you see as bringing you great joy. Not just big ticket things, but smaller things.  [Corrie ten Boom, and the joy she found in even concentration camps.]   There’s the possibilities that we can grow in our capacity to enjoy more and more things. This is a gift.

I want to ask you to do something. Can you think of a few things that you really enjoy? Try to think of 3-5 things. Write a list of them.

Am I really enjoying them? Am I fully enjoying them?

Let’s learn some more. Let’s hear Ecc loudly.

Lesson #2 – I make the most of God’s good gifts, when I turn to Him with a smile and enjoy my relationship with him even more.

We read that these gifts are His reward to us, or our inheritance, our lot, our share given to us from God. We have the potential to be pulled closer to God by his gifts. That really should be happening. Experiencing…

Gratitude – who am I that I could sit in this moment, having been given this grace, I experienced this

Awe – you have amazing capacities (planning, execution, generosity)

Intimacy – how much you must love me to give me this, I know something more of your heart for me by this

When I think of some of the greatest explorers, athletes, artists, technology/inventors, people who have done and seen and created some of the most amazing things, but don’t really have this perspective, they often seem to be left unsatisfied, empty, miserable. They don’t lean into the giver, and too often they’ve made themselves the center of their universe.

I see another misguided pitfall at times, even by Christians. I hear about enjoying gifts, but what about self-denial? Aren’t we supposed to take up our cross, deny ourselves. Shouldn’t we be talking about fasting, abstaining. Yes, Scripture has a place for that conversation. But that’s always meant to enjoy God more.

But I do want to exercise caution! Remember the scenario: Do you honor the gift by leaving it unopened, leaving everything unopened?

If you’re looking at your life as just one thing after another that God doesn’t want you to have or enjoy, could that be leading you to enjoy God less, not more. Could he have become a miser to you?

So, the things you said you really enjoy. How are they pointing and prompting your heart to enjoy God? Have you found yourself in awe, gratitude and intimacy? Are you drawing closer to Him? Could you sit in that for some time this afternoon and evaluate?

Another lesson, and it’s the hard one. We honor Ecc when we begin to see

Even if/when gifts are taken away, God is still the best giver. He is and always was the ultimate gift.

This is our reality check. If Ecc does anything well, it tells us that good things come to an end. We lose them, they fly away, they are taken away.

3 – a day comes when we will die, and earthly activities are over5 – we only have a few days9 – The days are fleeting, the grave is a reality

Sometimes the loss feels natural, sometimes it’s too early, sometimes it just doesn’t seem right. We brace ourselves. Or do we brace ourselves?

Chasing the wind – trying to hold on to it, get it back, but it’s futile

Nostalgia – those were the good ole days, nothing will ever be better, anything good happened a long time ago.

Bitterness – more & more negative things. How dare you give me this?

That doesn’t seem like a foreign country. That could too easily be home to me if I am not careful.

So, we realize that we will lose good things. We can’t deny that. So, are you tempted to swing to another extreme: I’ll just be stoic. No emotions. I will tear up my list. No, no. You’ve experienced good things from God. That is your inheritance. God is not asking you to emotionally disconnect, and think less of those gifts. Ecc can’t and won’t just settle with you being emotionally disconnected.

When you see things as gifts from God, my guess is that losing them may sting even more because you have tasted how good they really are and how good the giver is. It’s not an illusion. It’s real.

So we sing words like:

That word above all earthly powers, No, thanks to them, abidethThe Spirit and the gifts are ours, Through Him who with us sidethLet goods and kindred go, This mortal life alsoThe body they may kill, God's truth abideth still, His Kingdom is forever

I don’t have to clutch them so tightly. I don’t have to be terrified to let them go, or see things change.

I am going to ask you to do a very difficult thing: take your list, process what it would mean to lose things (someday this will be gone…I won’t be able to hang on to it). That seems really devastating (but it actually may be the most honest thing you’ve done in a while). It’s jarring.

As you face those prospects, the only thing that can penetrate the despair or the cynicism is a recognition that we have a Father who has great compassion on us. He loves us. He loved us in our futility, emptiness, endings that come too soon and lives that often are too short. God sent his one and only Son Jesus to taste this life, and to give us a taste of something so much better. He died for sin, brokenness, rebellion against Him. He rose again to end all the effects of sin, and He rules and will restore everything.

Those who give up trying to be their own king/queen, but put their hope in Him, put their whole lives in His hand can face tomorrow, their lives are worth living because they know He lives. Is that you? Could that be you today? Could you make a decisive choice to follow Jesus, and entrust Him with everything?

If so, it’s a game changer. Because ALL of this is true…As you process one by one things being taken away, you can do two things.

Lean into God more. Again, he is and always was the ultimate gift. You say to yourself I STILL HAVE GOD. HE WILL ALWAYS LOVE ME. That’s what I need.

We don’t have to try to escape, but we can be more hopeful about the promises. Christians live in 2 worlds: the NOW and the NOT YET. You process what the “not yet” means for the “now” and you can say I STILL HAVE A BETTER FUTURE WITH HIM. Anything I lose now will be restored in ways I couldn’t even manage. My Father is such a good giver that I will never be shortchanged. The new heavens and new earth won’t be spent remembering the good ole days. In the end we lose nothing. And because we have Him, we gain everything.

Be Still My Soul

Be still, my soul: the Lord is on thy side. Bear patiently the cross of grief or pain.Leave to thy God to order and provide; In every change, He faithful will remain.Be still, my soul: thy best, thy heav’nly Friend Through thorny ways leads to a joyful end.

Be still, my soul: when dearest friends depart and all is darkened in the vale of tears,Then shalt thou better know His love, His heart, Who comes to soothe thy sorrow and thy fears. Be still, my soul: thy Jesus can repay From His own fullness all He takes away.restored.

Be still, my soul, thy God doth undertake, To guide the future as He has the past. Thy hope, thy confidence, let nothing shake, All now mysterious shall be bright at last. Be still, my soul, the waves and wind still know His voice who ruled them while He dwelt below

Be still, my soul: the hour is hast’ning on When we shall be forever with the Lord.When disappointment, grief, and fear are gone, Sorrow forgot, love’s purest joys restored.Be still, my soul: when change and tears are past All safe and blessed we shall meet at last.

<><><><><>

3.9.2025  Brainerd  (Sunday AM)