NOT A STRAIGHT LINETHE GOSPEL ACCORDING TO JUDAHGENESIS 43-44

INTRO: There are times when you watch a movie mainly because you really like a particular actor/actress. They are the main draw, but as you watch, you are actually more drawn to a different actor/actress.

Or you visit somewhere, and there is a famous world-renowned site, but you find yourself more impressed with something else.

Or maybe you have a favorite team/player, but as you watch a different player stands out, hustles, makes others better, resilient.

For the past several weeks we have been paying attention to the main character Joseph; how his life was not a straight line [Series Title].

We’ve covered several chapters in Genesis; our focus has been Joseph. He’s sold into slavery, but God sees to it that he rises in Egypt to a place of power. He’s in charge of international food distribution at a famine. And the ones who sold him into slavery (brothers), are trying to get food. It hasn’t gone well, and they don’t recognize Joseph is in charge now. We’ve been focused on Joseph, but Genesis 37-38 also told us about JUDAH.

Can I open that can of worms? Can I summarize the life of Judah so far?

In 37:26-27, Judah seems to be the ringleader in selling Joseph. There’s a callousness – he is our flesh and blood, but let’s sell him.

In 38, Judah chooses to leave the family and marry a Canaanite. Fairly complicated story, Judah deliberately didn’t honor family obligations (specifically to his widowed, daughter-in-law Tamar). She suffers and is left vulnerable. This is Judah.

After his wife dies, Judah wants a prostitute and actually comes across Tamar but she is masked/veiled (he doesn’t know who she is). She’s trying to find a way for Jacob to not dismiss her. Judah sleeps with her. Tamar who had been masked becomes pregnant.

Remember it’s Tamar (Judah doesn’t know), so when Judah finds out his DIL is pregnant, he is full of self-righteousness, and he moves aggressively to have her face the death penalty. He’s a full-scale hypocrite with the power to ruin his daughter-in-law.

Tamar presents proof he’s the father, and then it hits Judah – she was trying to honor the family, I wasn’t. Jacob says this – she is more righteous than I am (38:26). We haven’t really heard those words or that sentiment. He clearly identifies himself as the sinner.

She actually delivers twins: Perez and Zerah. Judah is the dad, Tamar is the mom. Scripture leaves Judah, and continues to track Joseph. Nothing prepares us for the powerful role Judah plays here.

We’ve been following Joseph, but Scripture also tracks Judah, who is a wrecking ball. But God works in situations like these.

Here’s what I would like to do today. Let’s pick up where we left off, some explanation (although a lot of this is really straightforward), and we’re going to keep our eye on this “supporting actor” Judah.

Last Sunday, the brothers had gone home. Simeon had to stay in Egypt as collateral, until dad would let the youngest brother Benjamin leave.

GENESIS 43:1-34

GENESIS 44:1-34

The tension between the brothers and Joseph is just about to resolve, but let’s press pause here. I know it’s a cliffhanger. Let’s take a moment and observe a few things, and see what they mean for us. We had focused for several weeks on Joseph, but what we also see now, is that compared to Gen 37-38, JUDAH HAS CHANGED

Judah once had initiated the suffering of others for his own gain. He was willing to make dad suffer, hurt Joseph, try to ignore Tamar.

Now he’s deeply moved by the vulnerability of his dad, he cares for Benjamin. Willing to suffer for someone. This family, his father, his brother now make a mark on his life.

Judah once had taken ZERO responsibility for his family

Now, it seems like he’s feeling all the weight of the past, and even offering a plan, and initiating steps of ultimate personal responsibility. Dad, I’ll take care of Benjamin.

Judah at one point was self-righteously and hypocritically willing to end his daughter-in-law Tamar’s life.

Now, he is willing to honor his sacrificial pledge at risk to his life – he’s not just a talker. He’s acting. Everything is on the line!

Judah has changed! Make no mistake – God doesn’t blur lines about what is good and evil. He holds people to account. Judah had done wrong, and we read about it.

God doesn’t discard the Judah’s of the Bible. They are central to His story. God brings Judah full circle, in a massive crisis moment for this family. Nothing excuses what he’s done, but that doesn’t mean he can’t change. How kind of the Lord NOT to give up on him. His father created a mess, Judah made it worse, still God will do something through Judah.

This is exactly what God regularly does. This is the way God works again and again in the Bible and even now. What does that mean for you?

JUDAH GIVES US A TASTE OF WHAT GOD DOES IN US THROUGH THE HOLY SPIRIT.

God changes people. When God works in this way in your life you change. And the work of the Spirit in the lives of those who have trusted in Jesus Christ is powerful when we come to the New Testament. You become a new creation, old things pass away, things become new. We sometimes have a hard time with this. Because we feel/believe…

“I am completely stuck. I could never change.” This is Judah, who was living as a stranger to God and grace.

“I have experienced pain as a victim” – those things have lasting impact, but it doesn’t mean you’ll never change, you’ll never make progress. The Lord shows mercy. He shows mercy to people like Judah, who grew up knowing his dad had favorites, brothers aren’t good role models. The Lord shows mercy to the mess and hard life that were just the air Judah had to breathe.

“I have deep regrets.” You’re not sure you could get over them. But forgiveness is possible. Experiencing freedom is possible.

God redeems and changes. This brings God great joy to do this (one sinner who repents). This is good news that we shouldn’t take for granted.

More and more, for sins and even mistakes, our world seems willing to offer no forgiveness (no way to deal with sins, other than sitting in loss/shame), no path of redemption/lifelines. You cross certain lines and your through (maybe that’s the anxiety you feel). Permanence.

God redeems and changes. This gives great hope. Knowing that God restores, renews, changes, breathes life back into us.

So, Judah’s story can call us home. Come out of hiding, run to God, not away. Church, let’s fight to be the place where God’s work in the lives of people like Judah is welcome. It’s those who are sick that need medical treatment. God doesn’t call the righteous, but sinners to repentance. What if Brainerd became the place of fresh starts, second chances, deep encounters with God’s surprising grace.  Judah gives us a taste of what God regularly does in us through the Holy Spirit.

There’s a melody line that is woven through Scripture. I hear it in the story when JUDAH OFFERS HIMSELF AS A SUBSTITUTE.

The idea of a sacrificial substitute becomes a core concept to understanding the Bible.

On a human level you have to appreciate the courage here. Judah makes a pledge to his dad (his life in exchange for Benjamin), and intends to keep it at great personal cost. He is prepared to lose his family, home, freedom.

The soldier at D-Day or the first responder in the twin towers, looking out for strangers, a deep love shown in heroic ways. We know there is something right and good about this.

Judah essentially says: someone has to be accountable. So that Benjamin can go free, I will take any punishment. And in Judah doing that, we’re being prepared for it to happen through the life and death of Jesus on the biggest scale possible: globally, eternally, permanently. JUDAH GIVES US A TASTE OF WHAT GOD DID FOR US THROUGH THE LIFE AND DEATH OF JESUS.

Think of the comparisonsJudah takes on the weight of the family as he becomes a representative, willing to bear guilt of another.

But to a much greater degree, Jesus takes on the weight of the entire world. He takes on the weight of our debt of sin against God.

Someone has said this about Judah: Judah's amazing integrity and self-sacrifice mend what had seemed hopelessly broken.

Jesus is innocent played no role in any breakdown, and yet he still came to mend this earth. Your life doesn’t have to be hopelessly broken.

Judah is willing to lay down his future for the pardon of Benjamin.

Jesus actually gives his life. Executed, buried.

John 15:13 – Greater love has no one than this, that someone lay down his life for his friends.John 10:18 – No one takes my life from me, I lay it down of my own choice.Mark 10:45 – For even the Son of Man came not to be served but to serve, and to give his life as a ransom for many.”

We’ve been looking at Joseph all these weeks, and today we’ve looked more deeply at Judah, but the one we’re REALLY looking for and looking at is JESUS! Judah gives us a taste, but you need to know there’s more than just a lot of similarities. There’s an even greater connection.

When it finally comes time for God to choose a family/king in (1 Sam. 16) to rule over all of Israel (and even the nations), He looks to Bethlehem of Judea/Judah. He picks a descendent of Judah/Tamar, a descendant of Perez (the firstborn of the twins), a young man named David. God looks at his heart, God makes him king, and promises the kingdom to his family. The family of David/Judah.

Another time Judah’s name comes up is in Matthew/Luke, when we’re introduced to Jesus – he is of the family of Judah.  A new covenant through the family of Judah (Perez)/David/Jesus. In the earthly bloodline of Jesus we have a story of grace and transformation. It’s no accident that Judah will be an ancestor of Jesus the Messiah.

As the Bible closes with all kinds of dramatic images in Revelation, we see in Rev 5:5 – Jesus is one who steps forward as the “Lion of the tribe of Judah”

So, this was never just about Joseph, not just about Judah, but Judah gives us a taste of what God did for us in Jesus.

CONCLUSION

This isn’t just a story you admire from a distance. This is one that you can experience for yourself, firsthand. God is just as real now, and he is writing stories of grace.

Some of you, you’ve had more than just a taste. You’ve had a deep experience of God’s grace through Jesus. Baptism is such a picture of that. God is changing you. You’re not perfect, life isn’t there yet, but things have changed for you because you turned from everything else, and you trusted in Jesus.

But for some of you, today is the day where you could put a stake in the ground. The only reason you can experience the change (new start) that God does in us through the Holy Spirit, is because of the work Jesus did for us at the cross. With Jesus, it’s personal to Him. What you do with him, matters). Have you believed?

If you haven’t found rest yet in the sacrificial mercy of Jesus for you, do so today. Call out to him. If that change has happened to you, let others know. Get baptized as a public declaration of the change God has made.

<><><><><>

9.21.2025    Brainerd  (Sunday AM)