NOT A STRAIGHT LINEABOVE AND BEYONDGENESIS 42

INTRO: Before we go to Genesis, I want to read some of the most beautiful verses in the Bible – Prayer to God from Paul for God’s people

Ephesians 3:14–21 14For this reason I kneel before the Father 15from whom every family in heaven and on earth is named. 16I pray that he may grant you, according to the riches of his glory, to be strengthened with power in your inner being through his Spirit, 17and that Christ may dwell in your hearts through faith. I pray that you, being rooted and firmly established in love, 18may be able to comprehend with all the saints what is the length and width, height and depth of God’s love, 19and to know Christ’s love that surpasses knowledge, so that you may be filled with all the fullness of God.

God loves in ways that surpass knowledge (3:14-19). What if we grasped that, we knew that, we were strengthened by that. Jesus Christ takes up residence in us, fills us with all the fullness of God

20Now to him who is able to do above and beyond all that we ask or think according to the power that works in us— 21to him be glory in the church and in Christ Jesus to all generations, forever and ever. Amen.

God works in above and beyond ways (20-21). We think about it. We ask God for it. God goes further. Working IN US. Past, present, future. I would love for you to really believe that deep down. First thought in the morning, last thought in the evening.

That is hard to hold on to, easy to slip away and erode. For lots of reasons

Decisions that aren’t easy, Tensions that can’t seem to resolveDoors that stay closed, Relationships that grow complicatedSituations you can’t avoid, Clarity you can’t findProblems that defy solutions

And so, our confidence erodes

As we continue our series in Genesis (series slide), the next 3-4 weeks things come together for Joseph and his family, but Genesis doesn’t present it quickly. So, each week we’re going to try to cover a chapter, but the final chapter won’t be written quite yet.

Which actually could help us. Things don’t “just happen” to us in a moment. We make decisions, navigate situations. And often God works over time in our lives. Not in a straight line.

But I started with those verse, because what if God surprises you.  In ways you have no category for.

I won’t promise you pie-in-the-sky. God isn’t a vending machine or a genie. I don’t have a right to say God will bring specific resolutions in specific ways to specific situations

At the same time, I wonder if there is a dangerous path we take sometimes:

We stop believing that God is up to muchWe stop hoping in God to do anythingWe stop seeing God as good, wise, faithful, powerful in specific situations.

God is never honored by our cynicism or our unbelief.

What if that began to change? What if each week we took ONE STEP toward hope, belief deep in our soul in the love and power of God in the hardest of situations?  That’s my hope/goal.

We’ve been tracking Joseph in Egypt. He’s risen to power. He’s pretty much 2nd in command, right behind the King of Egypt, Pharaoh. But the whole region is in crisis because of a famine. All the world needs the help of Egypt because only Egypt has a food supply. In chapter 42, the location changes, we go back to Joseph’s family – dad and brothers. We left them in Genesis 37. Now they’re back.  READ 1-5

We have a PRESENTING PROBLEM

There’s the thing that has our immediate attention. Often, there’s a much bigger thing in the background. The presenting problem here that they’re trying to solve – Jacob and the brothers need food.

Under the surface here, a few obvious things haven’t changedJacob’s relationship with his sons still is not good.

Why do you keep looking at each other? These are grown men. This isn’t a kind expression of fatherly care. Jacob’s is frustrated, maybe even is bitter toward them. And maybe they’ve earned that.

Related to that, Jacob is still playing favorites – “Benjamin, you’ll stay here.” Here’s a little picture of Jacob and his sons.  It sounds so messed up, but remember Jacob’s favorite wife, Rachel, had two sons, Joseph and then she died giving birth to Benjamin. Joseph is the favorite. But Jacob loses Joseph. We are two decades removed from Jacob “losing” Joseph, and he won’t let Benjamin out of his sight.

You have an issue of food, but below that I have questions…

Did all the other sons ever get stuck on the fact that their dad never wanted to marry their mom?

What does Jacob really think each day as he wakes up – if only my father in law had not given me Leah instead of Rachel. If only I hadn’t sent Joseph that day, if only ______.

Does the resentment of Jacob toward his family situation regularly trickle down? What do they do with that?

Does Jacob wake up saying, “Nothing can happen to Benjamin.” Is this really a great position for Benjamin to be in? He didn’t ask for that.

A couple of decades in. Do you think things are getting better? Changing for the good? Again we have a presenting problem of a family needing food, but deep down, life looks tough and no one is dealing with it.

That reminds me that this is the world we often live in. People trying to move forward, with some deep scars in life, but really not dealing with it. Does this describe you?

Maybe you just mindlessly surf the internet to escape, or try to make money or try retail therapy, Consumed with social media or the latest thing that’s creating a buzz, Hobbies becoming all consuming

Maybe it’s a little scary – functional addiction, some escapism/fantasy

Deep down there’s a lot of pain, you’re just trying to make it through, and you don’t have a lot of hope. If that is where you are, I want to invite you into this story. No magic formulas, but I think there’s hope.

Okay, so we have the presenting problem, READ 6-17

Not only do we have presenting problems, but we also have

COMPLICATED OPTIONS

These are hard decisions for Joseph. It can be really difficult to know the right thing to do, the right way to handle, it could blow up in your face

We’ve gotten a little into the head/heart of Jacob/brothers, but this story invites us to think of things through the lens of Joseph. He had moved on with his life. He is #2. His life is as comfortable as anyone’s in Egypt. But, two decades later, this had to shake him. You’ve probably had one of those: the call, the email, the letter, the conversation. Here, he recognized his brothers. He remembered the dreams

So, I do believe He had to come to terms with God’s work in His life for his good. We will unpack that later because it’s crucial, but right now the brothers are right there. Now, he is face to face with his brothers.

There are two paths he doesn’t chose

Immediate reveal – My guess is that he needs to see where they are, find out more, it’s too emotionally risky to open the doors of the past. Joseph is thoughtful. Joseph runs a country. Joseph seems to have a high degree of intelligence, but also emotional intelligence. And he’s got to think through some things and form a plan.

Give food or deny food and get them out of here ASAP – My guess is that he has something in him that wants to pursue more here (is it hope?).

Sometimes grace moves us toward a mess, but isn’t overly simplistic. If you just ______, then ________. I’ve come to find that

Instead he chooses a path that will take twists and turns over a couple of chapters. He chooses the path of engagement with conditions.

He makes an accusation (spies).He gives an option for relief (one goes the rest stay).He then temporarily imprisons (3 days). A lot going through his head

Let’s keep reading

18On the third day Joseph said to them, “I fear God—do this and you will live. 19If you are honest, let one of you be confined to the guardhouse, while the rest of you go and take grain to relieve the hunger of your households. 20Bring your youngest brother to me so that your words can be confirmed; then you won’t die.” And they consented to this.

Then, he changes the condition. He gives a new option for relief (one stays the rest go). Then we overhear a conversation.

21Then they said to each other, “Obviously, we are being punished for what we did to our brother. We saw his deep distress when he pleaded with us, but we would not listen. That is why this trouble has come to us.” 22But Reuben replied, “Didn’t I tell you not to harm the boy? But you wouldn’t listen. Now we must account for his blood!” 23They did not realize that Joseph understood them, since there was an interpreter between them. 24He turned away from them and wept.

They reveal what’s going on inside. All of them are talking to each other. Reuben speaks up. We’re dealing with this because of that. Joseph becomes emotional. I wonder if it’s because he never thought he would hear them say those words.

When he turned back and spoke to them, he took Simeon from them and had him bound before their eyes. 25Joseph then gave orders to fill their containers with grain, return each man’s silver to his sack, and give them provisions for their journey. This order was carried out.

Joseph initiates a test of honesty – Was it really all about money? Will you take the money and leave the brother for dead?

There also has to be some measure of hope that it could work – he might see Benjamin, see dad again.

26They loaded the grain on their donkeys and left there. 27At the place where they lodged for the night, one of them opened his sack to get feed for his donkey, and he saw his silver there at the top of his bag. 28He said to his brothers, “My silver has been returned! It’s here in my bag.” Their hearts sank. Trembling, they turned to one another and said, “What has God done to us?”

Their words here are telling – What is God doing to us?

LINGERING GUILT (of the brothers)

We can’t work through this chapter without thinking about inexcusable things we’ve done, what we believe about God, ourselves, grace

The brothers see God as the judge who is relentless

We saw Joseph’s distress, now we’re distressed/troubledHe pleaded, we didn’t listen; We have to give an accountWhat has God done to us (28). God has tracked us down.

There’s guilt, shame as they process. They aren’t wrong for feeling this. Would you recommend therapy that excused this, and glossed over things. Would that really be in their best interest?

A crisis moment like this may be for something good in your life. While it’s painful, guilt may challenge your ability to control. You may not even really know God, not really, but here you are, and your brain, and maybe your emotions are all over the place.

God may have set a good thing in motion, even as that’s hard to deal with right now. These brothers are on a pathway to deep encounter of forgiveness, but for now, their view of God is cloudy and incomplete.

READ 29–38

What you have is a situation going from bad to worse (everyone involved). Think about the diagram.

Jacob’s likely to have to deal with more pain, old wounds being reopened, and he seems as self-centered as ever.

Brothers are dealing with exposure and intensified guilt that really can’t be relieved. Simeon is bound, Reuben can’t seem to make anything happen. There doesn’t seem like any path forward.

Joseph has to be unsettled. He’s not sleeping well.

For whatever potential signs of change you see, it doesn’t seem as if there’s a tidy resolution.

PROLONGED PAIN for everyone involved

It’s unsatisfying! Genesis 42 leaves you with dysfunctional family knots tied so tightly, you wonder if they could ever be untied.

It’s just not uncommon to be having a conversation with someone who has gotten awful news, something that maybe won’t ever be really resolved. Thing that lasts decades. You get up from lunch, you read the text, and you go on with your day.

That’s the way it works sometime. That’s what happens.

CONCLUSION

You would be fair in protesting: nothing gives me hope based on what I’ve seen (even if I identify with it more than I would like to). In response I would say: be patient. God’s hands are here.

God gave dreams. God orchestrated international famines. God reset Egypt’s organizational chain of command. God DOES work in this situation. From every angle in the story it’s above and beyond all that Joseph, Jacob, Brothers expect Him to do.

I also would say…

Yes, if God can work in the life of Joseph, Jacob and these brothers, than he can work in your situation, because…

In the deepest, darkest day, the day where Jesus Christ was unjustly hung on a cross for sins, God was doing more than we could ask or imagine.

Jesus was atoning for our sin. He was satisfying the righteous wrath of God against all the sin that devastates this world, he was reconciling us to God, bringing us to Him, he was forgiving us, he was cancelling the record of wrongs that stood against us, and all that demands, he was undoing the power of sin, destroying the works of the devil, he was securing our future, making all things new, he was restoring all things, including our relationship with the God who loves us so much.

If God could do all of that through the horrendous death of Jesus, he can do above and beyond all we can ask or think. Is your heart ready to take that one step down the path of confidence in God?

<><><><><>

9.14.2025    Brainerd  (Sunday AM)