CHRIST WAS BORN FOR THISJESUS THE SONHEBREWS 1:1-4

INTRO:  If you were to drop by my office, something you couldn’t help but notice are my books, and a subsection of books that I’ve always enjoyed reading are biographies. I’ve noticed that some of my favorite biographies are those that have come out 20-30-40 years after someone is gone. A little time to put life into perspective.

That’s a big reason the NT is so gripping. Jesus the centerpiece of the entire Bible was crucified, resurrected, he ascended to heaven (around 30 AD). We have letters and books coming out 50’s, 60’s 70’s. They’re making sense of everything. Connecting dots, giving meaning.

When you read these writings, you understand more of WHY Jesus came into the world.

We love so many things about the Christmas story: angels, manger, wise men, shepherds, Joseph, Mary.

But, so many of the writers of the New Testament don’t rehearse all of those characters/aspects of the birth of Jesus as much as (guided by the Spirit) what the birth/life/death/resurrection/kingdom of Jesus really meant. Christ was born for THIS. What is the THIS that Christ was born for?

Each Sunday from now until Christmas we’ll sing Christmas carols, slow our hearts down, hear part of the Christmas story read. For some of you it’s going to be especially meaningful because you’re closer to Jesus than you’ve been in a long time. He has become part of your identity.

And for our time together in the Word, we’re going to see who Jesus is as He has come into our world, and what it all means for us. This is going to reinforce things for us, and draw us to Jesus.

Our first stop is going to be Hebrews 1. Let’s read HEBREWS 1:1-4

JESUS IS THE SON. God the Son. That’s the message of Hebrews.

From the beginning, Hebrews reminds us God’s always been interested in communicating: stories, proverbs, poetry, parables, symbols and prophecies. God communicated with his people for hundreds of years. He spoke to Abraham, Isaac, Jacob, Moses, Joshua, Samuel, Saul, David and the kings, prophets. That was then. That’s our baseline. God spoke.

But now – God has spoken by His Son. The Son has come to the world, and God speaks through him. So many places are like this. They don’t say the word “born/birth,” but they speak of Jesus coming into the world.

Who are we dealing with, reading about, singing about – Not just a great significant historical figure. He’s unique. Look at these descriptions.

God appointed Jesus heir of all things (2). The inheritance of Jesus came through appointment. God’s choice. He didn’t really have a “rise” to power or fame. This was always how it was meant to be. God appointed.

Alexander the Great, Sacajawea, Genghis Kahn, Queen Elizabeth all achieved all kinds of notable things. You can track their lives, progress. This sounds so different.

Absolutely everything belongs to Jesus – He is the rightful heir to it all.

Also, God made the universe through HIS SON. (2)

George Washington is the “Father of a nation”; Steve Jobs is the “creator” of technology/products. Jesus predates everything.

It’s so sweet to hear a kid ask… “Who made God? Who made Jesus? And the answer comes, “no one. No one made Jesus.”

In the beginning was the Word [Jesus], the Word was with God. The word was God, and everything was made by Him.

The Son is the radiance of God’s glory. (3)

The Christmas story brings us angels, stars, heavenly host, bright lights. This is so appropriate: wonder, beauty, radiance.

This comes with who God is and all that he is. No, Jesus didn’t walk around with a halo or a glow. You would see glory in Jesus, by how he radiated God’s goodness, mercy, grace, kindness. And occasionally, with Jesus, there would be moments just like light breaking through, the glory of God physically present. How sweet. How awesome to have been there.

PAUSE: No wonder so many disciples were just never the same, never going to abandon him permanently. Where else would they (YOU) go?

Hebrews begins to help you see a layer deeper. Not just an origin story with no real meaning to us

He “comes into our world.” Sounds different from the way we would speak of everyone else. He arrives on the scene. He appears.

Yes we know that just as many babies will be delivered today, this one (Jesus) would be the same. Human! “Congratulations you have a son.”

Unlike every other birth. He came into the world, came from God. This was different. And now we know. Now we can see

The next descriptions of the SON, if I can describe them this way, address so many of the challenges we have as humans. Our challenges which become problematic really quickly (and they are all high stakes)

1:3 “The Son is the radiance of God’s glory and the exact expression of his nature”

In other words: Jesus “is just like God,” or “is the same as God,” or “what God is like is what he is like,” or “what is true about God is true about his Son.”

If you’ve read your Old Testament, you would say, “No one is like God.” Very true. And yet here is Jesus who is the same, and distinct. This becomes so helpful to us.  Here’s a very challenging thing for us:

Until Jesus, WE DON’T KNOW EXACTLY WHAT GOD IS LIKE

You can guess, I can guess. You hear people say, “I don’t think God would ever…”  But, are they accurate? Could our heart/brain/intellect be slightly biased in our favor? Or could it be distorted by life, by sin, depression, suffering?

On our own, we don’t know exactly what God is like. Don’t get me wrong. In the OT, we actually learn a lot about God.

What pleases him? (deep love and faithfulness)What behavior is appropriate? (moral choices, not a relative world)What demands does he make? (holiness, but also mercy)What help does he offer? (save, rescue, atone, redeem)What kind of relationship does he have with people? (personal, not distant or transactional)

We have clues. We hear God speaking. Pillars, clouds, smoke, dreams. Through prophets, spokespeople, signs/wonders.

But it often seems so separate or even distant: other worldly.

But, then that all changes: We have the manger, the angels, the humility of a baby, who grows up to be a teenager then a young man, and then a man like no other man. What’s true about God Almighty (Father) is true of him.

Jesus “arrives.” now we know exactly what God is like (exact expression)

Jesus uses power / authority in hard, complex, tricky, difficult situations, a lot hangs in the balance.

Used wisely, tenderly, perfectly. People like you and me walk away better if/when we trust. In worse positions if we think we can wrestle authority away. Now we know

Jesus shows tenderness / kindness – don’t try to treat little kids like they don’t matter, don’t think pious displays rank above the one who humbly shows affection to Jesus. Down and outers find love; up-and-outers like Zaccheaus and Gentiles find He makes space for them, and initiates love.

absolute purity, no compromises or tradeoffs; he doesn’t have to deal in gray areas or technicalities. He doesn’t misuse words, no gossip, no dirty jokes, no prideful comments, no cruelty.

straight up justice and total mercy; authority, often used to serve the lowliest of people.

This is who Jesus is. Do you know Him? Do you find yourself in worship, in learning mode. Is he becoming more and more the center of your world: He brings an infusion of love/joy, wonder/peace, calm/trust. Because you know this is God. This is God the Son. And I know Him. and He knows me. We don’t know what God is like, until Jesus comes. There’s more

1:3: he is sustaining all things by his powerful word.

Which does speak to another challenge that we have as humans:

WE DON’T HOLD THE WORLD TOGETHER

All the sequencing, things that must coincide, good/bad, easy/hard, major/minor, relational/systems for the world to hold together.

Things progress, they taper. We need seasons: run hard, rest

How do you hold that together? We can’t. Some weeks, we can’t even get our calendar lined up helpfully. That’s a problem.

This world that spirals out of our control too often, can become a really dark place, and we don’t know exactly what to do with that. O Come O Come Emmanuel speaks to that – being held captive, a people mourning, lonely exile, gloomy clouds, death’s dark shadows, sad divisions

Ideally, I wouldn’t live in a world that deals with that. But things are less than ideal. I do live in that world, and it’s hard impossible to hold it all together.

And then Jesus comes, and he upholds it all, he holds it all together. It’s not that He made it all, gave it a good shove down the river, and we’ll see how it all works out. He is intricately involved.

Col. 1:17 – He is before all things, and by him all things hold together.

Working favorably – Eph. 1:19 the immeasurable greatness of his power toward us who believe, according to the mighty working of his strength.

All the promises, prophecies, fullness of time. It’s not disintegrating. He keeps the world. He keeps you and your world. Doesn’t mean you won’t feel destabilized.

Things aren’t always as they appear. Funny filters – mirror/distorted.

As you keep reading, you see other aspects of who Jesus is: After making purification for sins...

So, here’s another challenge we have:

WE CAN’T MAKE (OR KEEP OURSELVES) OURSELVES PURE/CLEAN

We say we’re sorry, stop doing something, maybe give something (internal scales), light a candle, recite a mantra, show up at church

sin again –– and then again –– hurt people, more peopleInternal, but it’s wrong, moral compass malfunctionssin unintentionally: “I didn’t mean to”do the thing you promised you wouldn’t do

Maybe you just tell yourself “I have no shame/guilt.”  Eventually that just runs on fumes. Of course it does. Life doesn’t work that way

What do we do about our problem. The Bible doesn’t hide it

Such a large vocabulary: words like sin, iniquity, rebellion, guilt, shame transgression, corruption, pollution. “Enough, I get it!” But we don’t get it do we, which is why we excuse, justify, blameshift, minimize.

Read the OT (organized way of dealing with sin) – sacrifices, offerings, prayers rituals, priests, Levites, temples, tabernacles

And even with all of that, it never seems finished and thorough. Important, necessary, steps in the right direction, but is it enough?

Then Jesus comes, finalizes purification (he makes it thorough/permanent)

Call his name Jesus / Joshua / Savior or rescuerLamb who will be the offering / takes away sinShepherd who has to die – lay down my lifeHe talks about making people clean

Conversations come up about blood/death (not morbid). Death is woven into fabric of life. That has to be dealt with, tasted, if there’s going to be deliverance. He makes purification. The King of Kings salvation brings

Forgiveness, reconciliation, atonement, cleansing, washing, removing, purifying, cancelling the debt, adopting, welcoming.

Purification/Cleansing comes through Jesus’ work on the cross: definitive (final). Purification/Cleansing comes through the avenue of confession (ongoing help, assurance that just as sure as that blood was shed, Jesus would never let my rebellion, sin, iniquity have the final word over my life)

You begin to get a sense of finality.

He sat down at the right hand of the Majesty on high.

The location matters. He does the work as High Priest. The work of Jesus is so effective, it is done once and it’s finished. He sits down as a King/Prince. His work for us stands. It can’t be undone.

Because while Jesus sits “on high” with work finished

WE AREN’T IN CHARGE OF EVERYTHING

We just aren’t. We try to take responsibility. We try to make good decisions. If we’re entrusted with something, we try to do our best. But we don’t have all authority and power. We can’t speak and make the most important things happen. We feel that.

But Jesus rules. Jesus with his work accomplished, what’s necessary for our redemption finished, he sits triumphantly, powerfully, and authoritatively in charge, ready to help (not keeping people pressed down, but interceding for them). Not just generic people, hypothetical people but YOU. Aches/pains, struggles, family squabbles, good intentions, steps of progress.

He is seated, ruling, in charge.

This this is Christ the Lord, the newborn King. Gloria. In excelsis deo.

Let earth receive her king. Joy to the world, the Savior reigns

He rules the world with truth and grace. Do you see him in that light?

Will we trust, will we obey, will we follow, will we submit. Will His agenda for our life be the most important, his voice be the loudest?

CONCLUSION

As I was reviewing this last night, I thought of how special this Christmas might be. Unusually dark season, coming back to your faith,

This is the season of manger scenes and advent calendars. Songs are going to take us to wise men, shepherds, fields, stars

But, we have an opportunity. Christ was born for this. The Son was born for this. Not just dramatic pyrotechnics or fireworks. This is no legend or creative myth.

Christ was born for peace, grace, hope, love, forgiveness and salvation.

Long ago, God spoke in a lot of different days. But in these last days, He has spoken in a superior way, definitive way, final way through His Son.

PRAYER: Son of God. Dear Jesus. We are listening. We want to hear what God has to say to us through you. Open our eyes to see you. Open our ears to hear you. Open our hearts to receive you as our King.

<><><><><>

11.30.2025  Brainerd  (Sunday AM)