HOW TO “PRACTICE RIGHTEOUSNESS”HOW TO FASTMATTHEW 6:16-24

INTRO:  We say dozens/hundreds of yes’s every single day. So, what do you say “yes” to?

Yes, I will schedule that appointment, meeting.Okay, yes, you can go on the trip.Yes, I will have another Reese’s peanut butter cup. Of course.

But we say NO as well. What do you say “no” to?

No, I will resist road rage despite the incompetent driver in front of me.No, I will pass on seconds at dinner. I’m trying to behave.No, I don’t need to do another hour of doomscrollingNo, we can’t go on that trip because we just don’t have enough money

What you say “no” to is an important issue. It’s something Jesus addresses in Matthew 6. We’ve been talking about How to Practice Righteousness

Righteousness is first something God gives to people who trust in Jesus Christ alone for their salvation. He clothes us in righteousness. He is righteous, and He gives us Jesus’ righteousness.

Righteousness is something to be put into practice (and practice implies we may not be ARE NOT there yet). It’s something we’re learning to grow into; others can see us looking like Jesus more and more (that’s the goal). We practice righteousness.

We started in Matthew 6:1

“Be careful not to practice your righteousness in front of others to be seen by them. Otherwise, you have no reward with your Father in heaven.

We said that often HOW we do something (in front of others) shows our WHY (to be seen by them)!

Giving – you could blast trumpets and let people know you write big checks; or you could give modestly and as anonymously as possible, God sees and rewards

Praying – you could parade on a street corner, you could go on and on with a ton of words; or you could pray simple quiet prayers, God hears and rewards

We come to another aspect of practicing righteousness

16“Whenever you fast, don’t be gloomy like the hypocrites. For they make their faces unattractive so that their fasting is obvious to people. Truly I tell you, they have their reward. 17But when you fast, put oil on your head and wash your face, 18so that your fasting isn’t obvious to others but to your Father who is in secret. And your Father who sees in secret will reward you.

LET’S THINK THROUGH HOW TO FAST

What is fasting here? The basic idea here is abstaining from food. This was done regularly at that time, it seems (agrarian, crops needed to come through). Jesus was addressing something common.

It’s worth expanding fasting a little though – as part of the worship you bring to God, fasting is saying “no” to something that is necessary or allowed.

We’re talking about fasting that’s an act of WORSHIP

Not abstaining for just physical, health reasons (lose weight)

Out of devotion and love. It’s an act of worship.Maybe out of desperation, I need the LordMaybe out of grief, something hurts, and I take some time to pour out my heart to Jesus.

The fasting we’re talking about is connected to your walk with God.

We say no to something that is NECESSARY

God’s designed our bodies to need nutrition. “Man shall not live by bread alone.” God designed our bodies to need fuel.

But, you are also free to voluntarily and (of course) temporarily say “no” to nutrition, food, fueling your body. For a meal or a timeframe, you deny yourself of something that’s necessary like food.

We also can say “no” to something that is normally ALLOWED (permitted)

We aren’t talking about saying no to “sin.” There are other verses and other teaching on that.

God gave us lots of things we are totally free to enjoy, blessings. God’s blessed humanity with many things and told us to enjoy them. All things are allowable (even if everything isn’t beneficial), Paul says.

But, you are also free to voluntarily say “no” to some things: Some foods, luxury items, technology, entertainment/hobby, usage of time, screentime

I could enjoy this and even honor God by enjoying the blessing, but as part of my worship to God, I will deny myself.

How does this all work? Likely it’s different for each person, but some common ground might be that

Saying no, denying ourselves heightens our spiritual sensitivity (less things to think about, hunger pains, or schedule reminders, or you just have time). You are able to focus on something carefully. Leads to prayer or doing something spiritually productive and intentional.

Maybe that leads to clarity or deeper assurance in your walk with the Lord. It’s about the potential of heightened spiritual sensitivity in your relationship with God.

Does that make sense? As part of your worship to God, fasting is saying “no” to something that is necessary or allowed.

So, what should we do with this? Jesus didn’t just teach to enlighten us or give us a nugget to add to our knowledge base. He taught to transform, to take us to places we would not go on our own, in our flesh. So, question

How often do you actually say no to something as an act of worship?

God is the God of creation, he holds things together (everything!), he initiated a rescue plan to personally redeem my life, he paid for all my sins and placed me in a spiritual family, he promised the presence of His Son, He has filled me with the Holy Spirit, He has a perfect future mapped out for me, and will finish every good thing He started in my life.

Is there anything he could not demand of me? Has he not given me far more than he could ever take away or I could give away. What would be too much for him to ask of me?

He is almighty, the Lord of Hosts, perfect in power, in love and purity.

So, how often do I respond to that, as an act of worship, by saying no to something necessary or allowed. Does my allegiance to Him and trust in Him show up in saying no?

As part of my devotion to him, as part of practicing righteousness, do I come to places and go, I can take a pass on ________.

I have been convicted. I don’t think Jesus was directly talking to upper middle class people in this scene. He was talking to people who likely couldn’t indulge like we can.

We live in a world where we actually are encouraged to pursue comfort, efficiency, luxury, being pampered, escape, some fantasy land. Everything markets us to live in that world.

Another upgrade, subscription, another thing that makes life easy. You DESERVE it!

Even when we know we can’t get that “extra thing”, we want it, and it stays on our radar (we envy, covet). And Jesus gently but powerfully raises the issue of WHENEVER YOU FAST, whenever you say no.

I am not saying it’s wrong to enjoy things. I just want to counterbalance that some with what we’re saying no to. Is there anything?

Are you with me on that? Are we willing to be a little uncomfortable as we sit in that question? How often do you actually say “no” to something as an act of worship?

Let’s play out some scenarios. The last thing we need to do is to be hearers of this but not doers.

So, let’s say that next Tuesday you decide, “I am going to practice righteousness by saying no. Not only will I find someone in need to give to, and not only will I ask my Father for things, I also am going to

Not eat a meal or two (or more). And with that time, I will _______, and as I have reminders, hunger pains, I will ___________.

Take some time off of screens (a portion of the day, or more). And with that time, I will _______, and as I have reminders, hunger pains, I will ___________.

What else comes to mind? [Parenting/housework!? Not so fast]

Anything? Maybe this is a good discussion for friends, or Dgroups or LifeGroups. Are there large quantities of time/money sunk in some things?

For clarity, I don’t think Scripture clearly says “everyone must do this,” but I think it certainly says, you are free to fast.

So, let’s say you choose to do that. What then? I can imagine the Father seeing that and being really pleased. I think there could be some places spiritually that may serve your soul. Not out of hocus-pocus, but out of a single-minded focus on the things of God,

Can you see why it’s important to think about what you say NO to? But before we make too many plans or excuses, we need to live in the book of Matthew some more, and when we do, I believe we will receive 2 cautions and 2 perspectives. A caution, 2 perspectives, and another caution.

Let’s start with CAUTION #1 – in saying no, don’t be a show off

16“Whenever you fast, don’t be gloomy like the hypocrites. For they make their faces unattractive so that their fasting is obvious to people. Truly I tell you, they have their reward. 17But when you fast, put oil on your head and wash your face, 18so that your fasting isn’t obvious to others but to your Father who is in secret. And your Father who sees in secret will reward you.

Fasting (saying no) is somewhat different from giving and prayer.

In fasting, how would we ever know if you didn’t have your pancakes this morning, or your steak and potatoes last night, unless we asked. No one would ever know, so we can try to make sure people do

So Jesus is calling out a temptation to give some physical signs, maybe hoping people would notice, ask, pursue it a little further.

WRONG – don’t do it that way. Make the effort to present yourself as having a normal day, almost a festival day. To be clear – decide NOT to make a spectacle of it. God sees, he knows and rewards.

But, as we keep reading, we see a perspective we should have:

19“Don’t store up for yourselves treasures on earth, where moth and rust destroy and where thieves break in and steal. 20But store up for yourselves treasures in heaven, where neither moth nor rust destroys, and where thieves don’t break in and steal. 21For where your treasure is, there your heart will be also.

Perspective #1 (investment perspective) – saying no can be seen an investment (19-21)

What is this saying? Storing up a treasure is making a value statement (this matters to me, this is worth something to me).

Something matters more to me that just what I have immediately to show for it. I don’t need ______ now, because I am in pursuit of Jesus.

So, if we looked at denying ourselves, we would say the treasures of heaven are a heart that is more tender, alert to the things of God. The treasures of heaven are when we love him more deeply, when we’re more in tune with how he wants us to love others

So, we have these things that are necessary (food), things that are permissible (hobby/entertainment), and we say NO to these (voluntarily and temporarily), so I can say YES to this investment (storing up treasure)

I am making more deposits. I am focused on a heavenly treasure. That is where I want my life to count. That’s an important perspective.

Skip down to verse 24

24“No one can serve two masters, since either he will hate one and love the other, or he will be devoted to one and despise the other. You cannot serve both God and money.

Perspective #2 (service perspective) – saying no can be tied to serving our king/master (verse 24)

Jesus brings up the issue of having a Master. He does this many times. He assumes that there will be something in control of our lives. Someone or something will make demands of me, and I will submit. We may think we’re completely autonomous, but it’s an illusion, we’re always serving.

So, what happens when we say to something even like food: even hunger pains don’t rule me, I can say no, because Jesus is my master.

Or when we live on less, so that the love of money or greed or materialism or covetousness can never just bully us and make demands: “you must pay, buy more, go deeper into debt, have this, live this lifestyle”

Voluntarily, we put ourselves in submission to our master Jesus. We say because Jesus is my master, I won’t be ruled by anything else. I wonder if saying no has a way of weakening the grip other things have on us. We say, “He can ask anything of me.” I am a living sacrifice for him.

2 perspectives, but I also said I had 2 cautions.

Caution #2 – don’t miss relationship or rest (Matthew 11:28-30)

I have a concern that hard times, or guilt, or some misunderstanding of the character or nature of God could embed itself, and we could get this badly wrong. Fueled by insecurity, I feel like we could find ourselves really hesitant when it comes to things of the Lord.

Jesus says we’re free to say “no” to things. Having said that, the heart of our walk with Jesus is him saying "Come to me,” not “avoid things for me.”

Matthew 11:28–30 28“Come to me, all of you who are weary and burdened, and I will give you rest. 29Take my yoke upon you and learn from me, because I am lowly and humble in heart, and you will find rest for your souls. 30For my yoke is easy and my burden is light.”

Caution #2 – don’t miss relationship or rest

In the end (and really from the beginning), it’s all about cultivating a relationship of trust, love, submission, devotion, obedience. So, anything that makes our relationship with God more of a payer/payee, or vending machine, or trading goods and services, or accounts payable/receivable has missed the mark.

So, YES you do have a master, and there is a yoke. But, the yoke we have placed on us is easy and light.

False religions and cults pull in the opposite direction (heavier and heavier demands that are life-draining not life-fueling)

Jesus has marked out something better for you.

One of the centerpieces of the Christian life is eating food (the Lord’s Supper), not a fast

CONCLUSION:

What will do with your yes’s and no’s this week?

<><><><><>

11.16.2025  Brainerd  (Sunday AM)