Progress ReportLORD AND MESSIAHActs 2:41, 47

INTRODUCTION

Reading of Acts 2:37-47, then Series Slide. We have 2 reports of progress in Acts 2. Verses 41 and 47.

41So those who accepted his message were baptized, and that day about three thousand people were added to them.47Every day the Lord added to their number those who were being saved.

Have you experienced a moment or an event so serious, so sobering

You either hug a loved one, maybe not let go

Or you decide right then and there, I need to make some changes

I am not being overly dramatic when I say, what happened in Acts 2 was like that for thousands of people. They are (1) pierced to the heart, saying (2) what do we need to do. I think it may have the same effect on us

Can I challenge you? Maybe history is not your thing, so even though you know there are some important days (Lincoln’s Assassination, D-Day, 9/11), you don’t necessarily lock in. Learn some facts, sometimes events in the Bible seem like that. Good for Bible history nerds.

Significant event, defining moment in the past that changed the course of your family forever. details, slow down, try to understand, appreciate ripple effects. You’ve got to dig deeper

Maybe this helps: the perspective of 2 hypothetical people,  Joseph Elizabeth (Joe/Liz). They reside in Jerusalem, lived there their whole lives.

It was Feast of Weeks, Pentecost, 50 days after Passover. It was just a 1-day feast, where some of the first grain is gathered in (sacrifice & offerings)

Many Jewish people scattered would make their way from all over the Mediterranean to Jerusalem (much like Passover). Population surges in Jerusalem, Good news for Joe because he’s in the money world, investing, helping people handle their currency

On this Pentecost there’s a commotion in the streets. The first thing that Joe observes are people, some of which are clearly not educated, some of which are from Galilee, speaking a language (not Hebrew, Aramaic), and the travelers from Egypt are understanding and the travelers from all over Asia understand, and those from the island of Crete understand in their own language

Liz is close by, so Joe finds her and brings her to the spectacle

People are talking about something earlier that day contained fire, unusual wind-sound

I don’t know if Joe would’ve made the connection – Wind/breath is often the same word in the OT as Spirit.

Fire means God is doing something. Fire came down from heaven when the glory of the Lord filled the temple. Fire fell on Elijah’s sacrifice. John the Baptist had said that one was coming who would baptize people with the Holy Spirit and fire.

And Liz certainly may not make the connection that day of ancient Hebrew Scripture that spoke of the Tower of Babel, where there was confusion, not understanding, where languages created division, not where they came together. He is witnessing the reverse of Tower of Babel

A few cynical people dismiss this as “these guys are drunk and making a scene”

One of the leaders of the group who started the commotion (named Peter) gathers people’s attention, and it’s almost as if he is a witness, telling people exactly what is happening. Not really like a formal sermon, but it’s not hard to see it revolving around some questions

WHAT TIME IS IT?

16On the contrary, this is what was spoken through the prophet Joel:

Something had been promised

17And it will be in the last days, says God, that I will pour out my Spirit on all people; then your sons and your daughters will prophesy, your young men will see visions, and your old men will dream dreams. 18I will even pour out my Spirit on my servants in those days, both men and women and they will prophesy.

New era – last days (not business as usual). Spirit doesn’t just get poured out on a few, but on all of God’s servants

Speaking words of truth (everyone)Deep confirmation/assurance & Internal transformationSpirit-capacities that bring God’s glory, serve others, further His work

19I will display wonders in the heaven above and signs on the earth below: blood and fire and a cloud of smoke. 20The sun will be turned to darkness and the moon to blood before the great and glorious day of the Lord comes. 21Then everyone who calls on the name of the Lord will be saved.

“Saving” comes in the equation – day of the Lord. Only hope on that day is a response/call on the name of the Lord

What time is it? Time to ADJUST YOUR SPIRITUAL CLOCK. The first part of what Peter says, is you need to realize what time it is. The last days. Things are different from now until this great day of the Lord.

We have no indication from Scripture that the “last days” are over. We’re still in them. So, God has sent His Spirit on His people.

But also, a day of judgment is coming. You better be ready.

We have a connection to make. Liz and Joe are probably asking, “Who is this LORD, what does that mean?

WHAT exactly IS HAPPENING?

God is telling us to be alert, be prepared, but so far there hasn’t been a direct connection in this chapter between the Spirit coming, this event, and what happened with Jesus. Here it is

22“Fellow Israelites, listen to these words: This Jesus of Nazareth was a man attested to you by God with miracles, wonders, and signs that God did among you through him, just as you yourselves know.

When Jesus lived, clearly evident that he was God-anointed, God-directed, God-empowered He was attested to you BY GOD. “God did among you through him.” You know this.

Joe/Liz weren’t super close to all this, but they had followed from a distance, and something about Jesus had stuck out to them

23Though he was delivered up according to God’s determined plan and foreknowledge, you used lawless people to nail him to a cross and kill him.

When Jesus died, God was directing, even sinful actions to accomplish his purposes

Do our friends Joe/Liz appreciate some of the Scriptures in Isaiah that Jesus would be not just a mighty-miracle worker, but a servant who suffers, numbered with transgressors, wounded for us, punished for his people, not his own sin. God was at work.

24God raised him up, ending the pains of death, because it was not possible for him to be held by death.

As He rose, God was directing, bigger agenda/plans that had to be achieved God is up to something. Any rumor was confirmed here.

What is happening? What Joe/Liz hear is that GOD HAS WORKED AND IS WORKING THROUGH JESUS (life, death, resurrection)

There is this push in the Bible that there is ONE BIG STORY. It comes together. The threads are woven together. Which is one of the reasons why when Peter talks about calling on the name of the Lord, and connects it with Jesus. Peter’s mind goes to Psalms that David wrote.

The next several verses (Acts 2:25-33) draw out a connection from Psalm 16. People who had studied Hebrew Scripture their whole lives might appreciate it more than we would. There is a logic, especially in verse 31.

31Seeing what was to come, David spoke concerning the resurrection of the Messiah: He was not abandoned in Hades, and his flesh did not experience decay.

Psalm 16 says Messiah will be raisedJesus was raised (32)Jesus is the Messiah

33Therefore, since he has been exalted to the right hand of God and has received from the Father the promised Holy Spirit, he has poured out what you both see and hear.

Jesus is the Messiah – Worldwide ruler, confirmation of all God’s promises to Israel, but worldwide blessing

Not just making a statement about his authority/power. He is giving the Spirit. That’s something only God can do. YES! Jesus is the Messiah, and he is God in flesh. And he is giving His people the Spirit

There’s another connection to a different Psalm. In Acts 2:34-35, you get a pointer to Psalm 110.

34For it was not David who ascended into the heavens, but he himself says: The Lord declared to my Lord, ‘Sit at my right hand 35until I make your enemies your footstool.’

Psalm 110 says there will be another Lord who reigns with GodJesus reigns with the Father (decision to pour out the Spirit)Jesus is the Lord

When you hear the sense of Jesus being Lord, this requires personal submission. You hear British shows and the characters saying, “yes, my Lord.”

You have authority over me. I say, “your will be done, your name be made great, it’s about your kingdom, not mine.

Question: As we share an announcement of good news, does it sound like this? Or does it sound much more transactional? “You’ve made some mistakes, say sorry, and get life forever. Not a bad deal!” But, there aren’t deals being made in Acts 2. Verse 36 pulls so much together

36“Therefore let all the house of Israel know with certainty that God has made this Jesus, whom you crucified, both Lord and Messiah.”

This sentence could be and is such great news. Therefore let all the house of Israel know with certainty that God has made this Jesus … both Lord and Messiah. But, that leaves out 3 words – whom you crucified. When you add them, it’s the worst news ever: we killed him.

Lord/Messiah, came we killed him; he rose, what will happen to us. What will happen on that great day when we will all face him? How can we be saved? How can we call on him for help?

And so people like Joe/Liz ask

37When they heard this, they were pierced to the heart and said to Peter and the rest of the apostles, “Brothers, what should we do?”

There’s the question. What time is it? What is happening? Now…

WHAT SHOULD WE DO?

It’s not just that life is a little jammed up, feeling a bit overwhelmed, acquired a few bad habits, need some God in my life, be more grounded, centered, connected, or it can’t hurt anything

And there is no flinching on the answer in verse 38 – EACH PERSON MUST RESPOND. And even if you’ve heard this all a million times each of us even today should be dialed in.

What does Peter say to people like Joe and Liz. The waters aren’t muddy here. The response is one of Direction and Identification

38Peter replied, “Repent and be baptized, each of you, in the name of Jesus Christ for the forgiveness of your sins, and you will receive the gift of the Holy Spirit. 39For the promise is for you and for your children, and for all who are far off, as many as the Lord our God will call.”

Repentance – change of mind/direction, wholesale (more than new year, new you)

Identification – my life is completely immersed in the reality/name of Jesus (his story is mine, his life, death, resurrection), he grounds, he directs

Each of you – because you’re an American, Protestant, Baptist family

Beautiful gifts (sins forgiven, Spirit received)

All the sins – thoughtless word, selfish act, prideful thought, moment of envy, flash of lust, willing act of disobedience, an attitude of vengeance, minor moment of thievery, bending truth, wanting your glory more than God’s, giving into addiction, working to make these things seem smaller than they are

All the sins forgiven, cleared, pardoned, atoned for, justified

The Spirit received – not partial, but complete (assurance, gifting, transforming)

Live offer/promise – for you, children, far off (Gentiles)

What should we do? Each person must respond. One more reminder of the danger.

40With many other words he testified and strongly urged them, saying, “Be saved from this corrupt generation!”

The sense is that this is more than just a few things to think about; either way, I think you’ll be fine

Corrupt generation = poisoned water/food supply, or organization that is just filled with unethical practices, or a tree is just rotten from the inside

What happens: They respond and it happens

41So those who accepted his message were baptized, and that day about three thousand people were added to them.

domain of darkness to kingdom of light outsider to insiderbondage to free   headed toward destruction to permanently rescuedstranger to son/daughter

CONCLUSION: What should YOU do? Joe and Liz were only hypothetical. The message really is so serious, so sobering.

If you say, that is me. I have made a directional decision, identifying with Jesus. Gratitude for that happening in you. Pray for our church to be consumed with this massive transfer

Respond like them

Accept that message – verbalize that to God

Invitation to pursue baptism – there might be all sorts of reasons you could come up with

not ready, not perfectwhat am I saying about previous beliefsI don’t like public things in front of people

3000 people said, I will identify with Jesus, my life is immersed in his

SPACE to think through

<><><><><>

1.19.2025    Brainerd  (Sunday AM)