Progress ReportDEVOTED TO PRAYERSelected Scriptures in Acts

INTRO:

In sports, you keep score. You keep track of records and who might break them. In business there are quarterly earnings. In the health world, there’s data we extract from tests. We find ways to measure progress.

Our series is Progress Report (series slide). Lord-willing, we’re going to spend the next several weeks looking at a book of the Bible that documents progress of the church after Jesus has died on the cross and has returned to heaven. We call the book Acts, or Acts of the Apostles, or if you want to be more precise Acts of the Risen Lord Jesus working through the Apostles by the power of the Holy Spirit. We’ll just refer to it as Acts.

We’re going to make several important stops in Acts to watch and learn how progress is measured for God’s people living together in community. Today, is something like the Goodyear blimp. I want us to see something you can view best from a certain altitude. I want to pick up one theme that runs through Acts: it’s the theme of prayer.

Luke starts that theme in his first volume (gospel of Luke). He tells us that Jesus encouraged followers to pray without stopping. He encouraged them to ask, seek, knock. He gave them requests to pray.

The book of Acts is volume 2 for Luke: same writer, same style, same language and same emphases, one of those is prayer

So here’s my goal for us today: By looking at Acts, I want us leaving very convinced that Jesus wants our church to consciously and confidently and continuously depend on Him.

for some that might be a real shift. For others it’s just reinforcing something you’re already convinced of

You see Jesus wants us to do more than just be inspired by his example, or enlightened by his teaching, or fired up by his sacrifice

One of the driving reasons he came, he lived, he died, he rose again, he ascended was for us to have a specific relationship of dependence on Him as we pray to our Father

We are now brought into the family, not as guests or on a work visa but as sons/daughters, and one thing that means is we pray

We could still feel isolated, and so Jesus promised to give us his Spirit, helping us when we’re not sure what we should pray

Jesus fully expects that His church, his body, his family, will in real-time, draw strength and hope and help from him

For a minute, let’s ask: Does Jesus expect us to “call him in” on any assignments we have, any aspects of our functioning as a church?

Is there any time we should think: this is beyond our training, our capability, what can be reasonably executed;  Jesus would know what’s best here, let’s ask;  Jesus would be able to accomplish something significant here, let’s bring him in on this

I want us leaving very convinced that Jesus wants our church to consciously, confidently and continuously depend on Him.

Let’s make a few stops in the book of Acts. Acts starts with a bunch of disciples who have acquired baggage: Peter denied, Thomas doubted, a lot of disciples fled the crucifixion, missed what He had been signaling.

Jesus gives them a promise and tells them to be patient as they wait for empowerment.

1:8 – You’ill receive power when the Holy Spirit has come on you, you will be my witnesses in Jerusalem, in all Judea/Samaria, and to the ends of the earth.

What happens next, what does patience look like, what does faithfulness look like, what does “your kingdom come” look like?

It’s clear they evaluate things correctly: We really need the presence and power of Jesus on this one.

1:12–14 – 12Then they returned to Jerusalem from the Mount of Olives, which is near Jerusalem—a Sabbath day’s journey away. 13When they arrived, they went to the room upstairs where they were staying: Peter, John, James, Andrew, Philip, Thomas, Bartholomew, Matthew, James the son of Alphaeus, Simon the Zealot, and Judas the son of James. 14They all were continually united in prayer, along with the women, including Mary the mother of Jesus, and his brothers.

“Continually” speaks of devotion. You’re loyal toward something. When you’re devoted you give all or a large part of your time or resources to a person, activity, or cause.

What are they praying about? What is this witnessing going to look like? How will the gates of hell not prevail against Jesus’ church? Somehow they sense the need to deal with a vacancy left by Judas the betrayer

24Then they prayed, “You, Lord, know everyone’s hearts; show which of these two you have chosen 25to take the place in this apostolic ministry that Judas left to go where he belongs.”

One of the first kinds of prayers we pray: Lord, YOU KNOW…SHOW US (there’s no way we can know). This is more than a “next man up” mindset

Jesus had told them that the fields are harvest ready, but what about leadership, coordination, giftings, calling

There is some action that’s required: Who can have the conversations, who can help coordinate, help fund, help serve, who’s the hospitality person, who can help lead, who will go. Character, ability, reliability, faithful and loyal

We need Jesus on this one. Lord, you know. Show us.

Does it work like this at Brainerd? Is there that same conscious, confident, continuous dependence on Jesus.

This mindset shows up again when the Lord reveals who should be deacons/servants. Early challenges that the church faces. Who should take responsibility and run with something. The community of Jesus selects individuals to come alongside the apostles for ministry purposes.

Acts 6:5-6 – So they chose Stephen, a man full of faith and the Holy Spirit, and Philip, Prochorus, Nicanor, Timon, Parmenas, and Nicolaus, a convert from Antioch. They had them stand before the apostles, who prayed and laid their hands on them.

Sense of commissioning, ordaining, setting apart (there’s no way you’re going to be effective)

Acts 13:1–3 1Now there were in the church at Antioch prophets and teachers, Barnabas, Simeon who was called Niger, Lucius of Cyrene, Manaen a lifelong friend of Herod the tetrarch, and Saul. 2While they were worshiping the Lord and fasting, the Holy Spirit said, “Set apart for me Barnabas and Saul for the work to which I have called them.” 3Then after fasting and praying they laid their hands on them and sent them off.

We’re going to send our best out to places where Jesus is not known. They’re going to new areas, pioneer, evangelize, teach, baptize, establish churches, develop leaders. We need to call Jesus in on this one

At the end of mission trip #1

14:21–23 21After they had preached the gospel in that town and made many disciples, they returned to Lystra, to Iconium, and to Antioch, 22strengthening the disciples by encouraging them to continue in the faith and by telling them, “It is necessary to go through many hardships to enter the kingdom of God.” 23When they had appointed elders for them in every church and prayed with fasting, they committed them to the Lord in whom they had believed.

One way a conscious, confident, continuous dependence on the Lord shows up is when we pray, Lord you know show us.

There’s more: In the book of Acts, communities made up of followers of Jesus regularly find themselves in desperate situations

That shouldn’t be surprising: Life can be really hard

with bodies that are wasting away, world that is groaning

An enemy described as a lion, dragon intent on stealing, killing, destroying, lying, deceiving

Yet, our purpose is that the kingdom of darkness would shrink. Buckle up, there’s some turbulence. We’re going to have to call Jesus in on this one.

Apostles arrested (mainly for resurrection preaching, and healing

Acts 4:23–24 After they were released, they went to their own people and reported everything the chief priests and the elders had said to them. When they heard this, they raised their voices together to God and said, “Master, you are the one who made the heaven, the earth, and the sea, and everything in them.

Acts 4:29–31 29And now, Lord, consider their threats, and grant that your servants may speak your word with all boldness, 30while you stretch out your hand for healing, and signs and wonders are performed through the name of your holy servant Jesus.” 31When they had prayed, the place where they were assembled was shaken, and they were all filled with the Holy Spirit and began to speak the word of God boldly.

Another kind of prayer. It’s the MASTER, YOU ARE THE ONE… (4:24)

Recognizes his sovereignty and power and authority.

When you submit to King Jesus, it threatens power-hungry despots

Acts 12:1–5 1About that time King Herod violently attacked some who belonged to the church, 2and he executed James, John’s brother, with the sword. 3When he saw that it pleased the Jews, he proceeded to arrest Peter too 5So Peter was kept in prison, but the church was praying fervently to God for him.

Philippi – Paul released people from spiritual bondage (not if that was making people money)

Acts 16:25 – About midnight Paul and Silas were praying and singing hymns to God, and the prisoners were listening to them.

Brainerd, do we pray these?

Adverse circumstances – Seemingly put on the defensive (not the offensive)

Maybe it’s not direct persecutionMaybe it’s just unusually challenging season.Several families of Ukrainian believers have resettled

We pray, Master, you are the One.

Can we look at another aspect of this dependence on Jesus?

In Acts 20 – Paul has invested time into a group of believers in Ephesus. Paul is traveling through the region, and it’s clear that a season of ministry is changing. There’s not any more he can give.

Things could be permanently different. There are goodbyes.

This passage reminds me that earthly speaking, we reach our limits, we’re not omniscient, omnipresent, omnipotent

Paul cares so deeply for these people. He senses danger ahead, he hungers for steady following. He wants to protect the people he loves so much. We need Jesus for this one

32And now I commit you to God and to the word of his grace, which is able to build you up and to give you an inheritance among all who are sanctified.

36After he said this, he knelt down and prayed with all of them. 37There were many tears shed by everyone.

These are the I COMMIT YOU TO GOD prayers.

These are some of the hardest prayers. They require a high level of dependence on Jesus.

Question: Don’t you get the sense that they’re calling in Jesus all the time. Acts is a book of prayer (you see it everywhere, and once you see it, you can’t unsee it)

Several Individuals like Cornelius – point us to the praying people

Acts 10:2 2He was a devout man and feared God along with his whole household. He did many charitable deeds for the Jewish people and always prayed to God. Acts 10:4 4Staring at him in awe, he said, “What is it, Lord?” The angel told him, “Your prayers and your acts of charity have ascended as a memorial offering before God.

Peter and John in Acts 3

Acts 3:1 1Now Peter and John were going up to the temple for the time of prayer at three in the afternoon.

Paul goes to a place of prayer in Philippi – Acts 16

Acts 16:11–14 11From Troas we put out to sea and sailed straight for Samothrace, the next day to Neapolis, 12and from there to Philippi, a Roman colony and a leading city of the district of Macedonia. We stayed in that city for several days. 13On the Sabbath day we went outside the city gate by the river, where we expected to find a place of prayer. We sat down and spoke to the women gathered there. 14A God-fearing woman named Lydia, a dealer in purple cloth from the city of Thyatira, was listening. The Lord opened her heart to respond to what Paul was saying.

Saul —> Paul – he is praying – Acts 9

9:10–11 10There was a disciple in Damascus named Ananias, and the Lord said to him in a vision, “Ananias.” “Here I am, Lord,” he replied. 11“Get up and go to the street called Straight,” the Lord said to him, “to the house of Judas, and ask for a man from Tarsus named Saul, since he is praying there.

Peter – Acts 10 – personal assignment while praying

10:9 9The next day, as they were on their journey and approaching the city, Peter went up on the housetop about the sixth hour to pray.

Community

Acts 2:42 42They devoted themselves to the apostles’ teaching, to the fellowship, to the breaking of bread, and to prayer.

Leadership/prayer – 6 – devote ourselves

6:4 4But we will devote ourselves to prayer and to the ministry of the word.”

All throughout the Epistles – Prayer is the REBAR of the church – forming and reinforcing the structure of everything they’re doing, building

CONCLUSION

We can be very convinced that Jesus wants our church to consciously and confidently and continuously depend on Him.

If that happens, it will lead us not to just some low-grade guilt, but to some spiritually healthy repentance

Independence – Manageable goals – we’re not surprised at all when we hit our financial, numerical, operational targets

Apathy – we just didn’t care

Ignorance – we didn’t realize that this was our fuel

What if the depending on Jesus culture was so strong that people who entered into Brainerd could feel it?

Coordinated efforts – How do we give a framework of these?Impromptu – just happens in a variety of ways, all the time.

Jesus wants our church to consciously and confidently and continuously depend on Him. Let me play out a few scenarios. Think through what they might look like. A few things on my heart.

We know that the Lord is building a community.

That’s tough. So, we call in Jesus. We lean on His power, His resources.

We know that people come to faith at a young age. We know that exposure to the gospel, other adults, kids/students learning

We also know that’s a fight

What if we depend on Jesus? Needle moves, faith becomes real, Jesus speaks, world is exposed. What has been called the anxious generation becomes the “dependent on Jesus” generation

We know that God uses people in their old age.

Sometimes that’s really challenging for a lot of reasons. God may have something in store for us.

So, we call in Jesus on this one. We operate at a high level of dependence on Jesus. What could happen?

We know that we have opportunities to play a role in nearly a dozen people being deployed.

It’s tough: they had assignments adjusted. Government, health, wisdom for family, breakdown of a team

Ephesians 3:20–21 20Now to him who is able to do above and beyond all that we ask or think according to the power that works in us— 21to him be glory in the church and in Christ Jesus to all generations, forever and ever. Amen.

<><><><><>

1.5.2025  Brainerd  (Sunday AM)