NOT A STRAIGHT LINEBLESSINGSGENESIS 48

INTRO: Do you consider yourself to be a lucky person? Would people say about you, “she catches all the breaks? He has all the luck.”

Some of you are laughing. You think that you’re the exact opposite!

Others of you may be a bit of a contrarian. “I find the harder I work, the luckier I am.”

If you’re a Christian, maybe instead of luck, you choose to phrase things a little differently. You like to say, I just feel I am “BLESSED.” But, whatever you call it, what do you think of catching breaks or being lucky/blessed.

Parking spot, always win the prize, get the upgrade, get the last of what you need, appointment, the great deal

Maybe it’s the more important stuff: picture-perfect life (family, friends, career, health, prosperity)

Seems like something or someone is looking out for you. “You’re blessed”

But when you’re wrestling with mental illness, infertility, cancer, conflict, drained by the demands of parenting or a job, aging. Do you really wake up with arthritis or loneliness, and just think, “Wow, I am really blessed.” Maybe not. But, are you still blessed?

What do we mean by "blessed”? It’s worth thinking about more deeply, and this is a good passage for us to do that. We talked a little bit about “blessings” last week, but I want to go more deeply.

So, are you really blessed? If so, what does that mean? If you are blessed, is that something you can pass on to others? How does that work?

Let’s read Genesis 48, and pay attention to the concept of blessing. Then, we can pull back, and ask, “What does that mean for us?”

We’ve been going through the life of Joseph – READ GENESIS 48

So, let’s circle back to a few verses, I want you to see something…

3Jacob said to Joseph, “God Almighty appeared to me at Luz in the land of Canaan and blessed me. 4He said to me, ‘I will make you fruitful and numerous; I will make many nations come from you, and I will give this land as a permanent possession to your future descendants.’

15Then he blessed Joseph and said: The God before whom my fathers Abraham and Isaac walked, the God who has been my shepherd all my life to this day, 16the angel who has redeemed me from all harm— may he bless these boys. And may they be called by my name and the names of my fathers Abraham and Isaac, and may they grow to be numerous within the land.

What do you see here? We go back into some previous chapters and we pick something up…I’ve had time to organize what we’re seeing.

BLESSINGS INVOLVE RELATIONSHIP, PROMISES AND THE FUTURE.

The subject of “Blessing” is a complicated subject when you talk about Jacob [almost like “how’s your family doing? how much time do you have]. 3 – when he says “God Almighty appeared to me at Luz in the land of Canaan and blessed me” it opens the door to a complicated subject.

Jacob cheated and stole a blessing from his brother Esau in Gen. 27.

He wrestled a man(+) for a blessing in Genesis 32 and was blessed

But in Genesis 35 – in Luz, there was this encounter where God appeared, and named Jacob Israel – You are mine, kings will come, descendants, land, future, it’s yours. No wrestling, no cheating. Just blessing.

A relationship that has been building from Abraham, Isaac, now Jacob. Promises that keep getting repeated and expanded

What’s being referred to has a much longer future, because they aren’t seeing it all right now.  You can be blessed, but not experience full dimensions of it yet. Waiting on something more, greater, better.

15-16 – These aren’t so much attributes of God, as they are experiences with God. We’re not in a theology textbook, we’re in a photo album, we’re in memories of life. God shows up here, and here, and here. I could not be where I am if God had not been present.

God has dealt faithfully in the past for generations (Abraham/Isaac)

God has shepherded – care/guidance (this was a man who knew how to take care of himself, who now saw life for what it was)

God/Angel has redeemed and delivered me from all evil

I love the naming. These boys will be called by my name, they will be full inheritors of the blessing.

Just beautiful. It’s a high point for sure. And yet, did you pick up on the clues that everything is not okay. Not just sunshine and pretty butterflies.

Jacob is weaker (1), memory/pain of losing Rachel (7)Diminishing eyesight (10), hopeless loss of Joseph (11)Death is drawing ever closer (21), and this is not home.

The entire next chapter (49) is an oracle/blessing for each of the brothers, but it’s also going back into some painful family history

BLESSINGS OPERATE IN A WORLD FILLED WITH BROKENNESS and pain. This relationship, promise operate in a broken world. A world where you wish that you could see it all made new. Do you see that?

There’s something else. While I think we can all appreciate the sentiment behind “the harder I work, the luckier I seem to be.” Something different happens when it comes to blessings.

BLESSINGS CAN ONLY/ALWAYS BE EXPLAINED BY GRACE.

This level and experience of blessing is NOT something Jacob (or even Abraham) created. You don’t manufacture the blessing. You don’t speak it into existence. God gives it.

The whole scene of E/M is interesting. I think we’re supposed to be shaking our heads a little. This family never follows the script.

And this family keeps repeating the same thing as we move through Genesis: God appeared and showed us grace.

Abraham could say, I was in Mesopotamia with no real relationship with Almighty God when God appeared and set me and my descendants apart – this is just grace

Isaac could say, “I wasn’t the oldest, and humanly-speaking should never have been born – this is just grace

Jacob could say, “I wasn’t the oldest, and was a wrecking ball – this is just grace.

Now both of Joseph’s sons could say, “we weren’t our grandpa’s sons, but he elevated us – this is just grace

Ephraim could say, “I wasn’t even the older brother – this is just grace.

Frankly all of them. The brokenness doesn’t stop the blessing. Mistakes, bad decisions, lifelong struggles, seasons of doubt, grief, hurt, distance. None of this is permanently disqualifying. What they’ve done, faulty wisdom, winding roads they've taken, I am committed to you forever. In the long run – names in Revelation (12 gates they are named with the 12 tribes)

You don’t earn this blessing. God is just determined to bring his grace into the lives of undeserving, needy, weak sinners. Blessings = Grace

Okay, but what about us, that was thousands of years ago. We’re not in ancient Egypt/Canaan, so this seems a little different. As you ask that, you’re probably already making some other connections…

I asked at the beginning “are you blessed?” Not just in a “life ain’t too bad” kind of way, but in a way that seems to be jumping off the pages of Genesis. What does this all mean for us?

I do have really good news for you. I mean ALL of you. Every single person here can experience something amazing.

Galatians 3 – family of Abraham

You know, then, that those who have faith, these are Abraham’s sons. Now the Scripture saw in advance that God would justify the Gentiles by faith and proclaimed the gospel ahead of time to Abraham, saying, All the nations will be blessed through you. Consequently, those who have faith are blessed with Abraham, who had faith. (Galatians 3:7–9)

The blessing of Abraham [comes] to the Gentiles by Christ Jesus, so that we could receive the promised Spirit through faith. (Galatians 3:14)

This blessing is not just locked into a specific family/ethnicity. It comes through that family, through Jesus to the world. That’s great news.

What does this mean for us? What we see in Scriptures is that…

JESUS CHRIST CAME TO BRING BLESSINGS TO ALL PEOPLE

I bring good news of great joy for all people. For unto you is born this day in the city of David, a Savior which is Christ the Lord.

We’re not reading deeply into Genesis 49 today, but it reinforces. Jacob pronounces a long-term blessing on Judah and his descendants. There would be a royal scepter in his line, an everlasting rule through the line of Judah. And you work backwards and see it’s Jesus. He rules the world with truth and grace. King of Kings, forever and ever. And Lord of Lords forever and ever. and He shall reign forever and ever.

Ephesians 1 – to a mostly Gentile church in Ephesus

Paul, an apostle of Christ Jesus by God’s will: To the faithful saints in Christ Jesus at Ephesus. Grace to you and peace from God our Father and the Lord Jesus Christ. Blessed is the God and Father of our Lord Jesus Christ, who has blessed us with every spiritual blessing in the heavens in Christ. (Eph 1:1–3)

Not one blessing left out. No short end of the stick. Nothing good does he keep back. No rationing it out. No deprivation.

Blessings come from the Father and by Christ, through our trust in his perfect life for us, his bloody death for us, his powerful resurrection for us, his current rule over us. EVERY blessing is ours. Great news.

On the surface it sounds like it could be something amazing, but it still may sound nebulous. Do spiritual blessing/heavenly places seem nice, but not relevant?  [Christmas gift that seems maybe like a luxury item, but you aren’t sure you will really use it.]

I would argue that the blessings in the heavens in Christ are the MOST relevant. However, if you think of heaven as harps, halos, soft music like when you’re put on hold, clouds and angel’s wings, I could understand why blessings from that place wouldn’t have an appeal.

But the way Scripture teaches, Heaven is a…

kingdom of prosperity, a great feast filled with great joy

Permanent removal of threats/enemies, complete harmony with nature

Peace and stability, which brings universal well-being, spills over into the whole world

What if every spiritual blessing in the heavenlies meant what matters most in heaven right now is actually ours – peace, identity, security, affection, pleasure of God, community, strength, comfort, abundance.  Paul is moving us to believe the too-good-to-be true. I came across a description one time, and I don’t know if I have it exactly right, but I heard that

BLESSINGS ARE THE PRESENCE OF THE BENEFITS OF HEAVEN, BREAKING THROUGH HERE AND NOW.

I think that’s incredibly clarifying. This is where it helps to tread pretty carefully. Not to diminish the blessing, but to make sure we’re reading it correctly.

We have blessings in the heavens, and we have one foot there, and one foot on earth. That affects this.

Eventually/future, everything, at max capacity, all the time

But for now, we get a taste, we get some experiences.

So, listen we get it. The world is messed up, filled with pain, grief, struggle. But experiencing blessings mean something so significant.

Blessings of God mean that even when you are overwhelmed, you aren’t left as vulnerable as you could have been, because heaven breaks through and you have peace. You are blessed.

Blessings of God mean that even when you are so distraught, you aren’t left as devastated as you could have been, because heaven breaks through and you have comfort. You experience blessing.

Blessings of God mean that even when one thing after another is taken away, you aren’t as shattered as you could have been, because heaven breaks through and you have security.

You have identity, community, strength, abundance. Heaven breaks through to you.

I REALLY want you assured of that.

when you don’t get the breaks, you’re targeted, lonely.when you have to wait, the prognosis doesn’t seem spectacularwhen a friendship seems to disappoint more than it comforts.

God is too wise to be mistaken. God is too good to be unkind. Blessings aren’t like a yo-yo, on again, off again. We’ve been blessed.

Have you experienced that? Maybe not to the ultimate extent in every single aspect of every single circumstance of your life, but still, hasn’t it broken through? Do you enjoy that? Praise God from whom all blessings flow, can you sing that?

But, it’s definitely worth pushing further. How can blessings extend beyond you? Could the presence of the benefits of heaven be experienced by others here and now through you. The answer is 100% “yes.”

The way you LIVE – You almost function like an agent of blessing (not your own). Chaos leaves, joy comes, life stabilizes, comfort is experienced, peace expands; taste of heaven – don’t we want to be this / do this

The way you SHARE – Isn’t evangelism, (more than a sales pitch) good news, a word of your desire for blessing – I want this for you

The way you PRAY – To bless someone is more than just a series of words said as a magic spell or charm. [abra cadabra, or hocus pocus]. We aren’t the creators or the manufacturers of the blessing, but we extend it. But we ask God for blessings on their lives.

CONCLUSION:

We live in a very harsh world where there is little blessing. It feels like we live in a world that often communicates you’re stupid, never get better, never figure things out, nobody can love you, accept you. But, what a different word we have to speak and to show.

We started with an old man named Jacob sharing a family blessing.

But, what lifts our hearts is that Jesus is the blessing from God. The one who broke through and gives healing, forgiveness, restoration, abundance, joy, strength, security and our identity.

So, I will close with a blessing.

Numbers 6:24–26 “The Lord bless you and keep you; the Lord make his face shine on you and be gracious to you; the Lord turn his face toward you and give you peace.”

“So they will put my name on the children of Israel, and I will bless them.”

<><><><><>

10.12.2025  Brainerd  (Sunday AM)