NOT A STRAIGHT LINENAVIGATING SUCCESSGENESIS 41

INTRO: How would you handle a crazy amount of success? Things fall into place. You’re not behind, you’re in the lead. You pass the test. You make partner. You get tenure. Recognition and rewards come. Compensation increases. The stress fades, relief and comfort increase. You’ve made it.

It's hard not to think: “That would be nice. REALLY nice.”

Do you think success like that changes people?

Does popularity and fame (celebrities/middle school). How about money, promotion, awards?

Sometimes, or pretty often, success does change people, doesn’t it? Maybe success just reveals what was always there.

As we come to Scripture, we find something very new this week. Joseph becomes successful and there aren’t any hitches.

Life of Joseph – what he’s experienced has been anything but a straight line or a smooth ride [SERIES TITLE SLIDE].

A straight line would be a family that is stable, doing the right thing. Joseph’s family seems bent on making a mess everywhere, envy, jealousy, hatred, anger.A straight line is keeping your nose clean and being rewarded, Joseph is punished.A straight line means when you serve others, they remember you (pay it forward), Joseph is forgotten when he needed to be remembered.

This story of Joseph resonates. We trace our own experiences, pain, sadness, perseverance, disappointment, through the life of Joseph. We’re learning God works in different ways than we expect or hope for. But, we also learn that the stories God writes are the best stories. He knows exactly what He’s doing.

So, 100% yes, God meets us in our low points, but what about the legitimate high points. That’s where we are today. I’ve found that SUCCESS can test you in ways ADVERSITY never does. If that’s the case, isn’t it worth it to prepare in advance for that? We look at a very different kind of question. What does it look like when things are successful, when they begin to REALLY go Joseph’s way?

Settle in a bit. This is a long chapter, but it is worth reading every single verse so we really gain an appreciation for what God has to teach us.

READ VERSES 1-15

Pharaoh has a problem. It’s one of these situations, not unlike work sometimes, where if the boss has a problem, everyone has a problem

READ 16-32

What you realize quickly is that this chapter really isn’t about Pharaoh and his problem. It’s not just about Joseph and his solution. Deep down we’re getting an inside look at something.

We’re thinking about success…so at the height of power, control, approval, security, accomplishment, influence, here’s a question

WHO RUNS THE WORLD – the power question

When success comes, how convinced are you that it really is God who runs the world. Who do you really see as in charge?

My English teachers would be proud of me, because I noticed who is the subject of so many sentences. When Joseph speaks, it’s not all about him, it’s GOD over and over again. Success hasn’t gone to his head.

God gives Pharoah an answer (16)God reveals what the dreams mean (25)God shows what he is doing (28)God gave the dream in the first place, he determines what’s going on, and he will carry it out (32)

When Joseph talks like this it doesn’t ring hollow. It lands. God has given Joseph so much grace. He’s so different from Nebuchadnezzar who said “I have built Babylon with my own hands.”

Let's be honest. It can be easy to feel like it's at least partially us. Things fall in place for you, who gets the credit.

Some luck, karma, combo of your skill, effort, etc.

Who is the subject of the sentences? Where do we honestly say, "I can’t, I couldn’t” OR is it really about how hard you’ve worked, wisdom you’ve disseminated, connections you’ve made, insight you’ve gained, awesome parental advice that you always seem to give freely. Is it a little about you?

Don’t get me wrong, Joseph is confident (not down on himself), but the real confidence is in the Lord. The Lord still helps us grasp that.

In heaven does all that he pleases  (Ps 115:3)He really does have the whole world in his hands (and more than that)he raises up nations and kings, puts them down (Dan 2 21)He gives, he takes away (Job 1:21)He is so strong, and so mighty there’s nothing our God cannot do

So, as you successfully run your company, make good grades, solve complex problems, manage your team, lead by serving, teach your class, guide your family, create amazing things...do ALL of that, but deep down, ask the Lord to cause you to know that it really is God.

It’s not about a performance, but it probably doesn’t hurt for you to say it and for others to hear it. Every realm is under His control. Every square inch is his. This God doesn’t have territorial limits. His rule is over every place, for all time.

How do you answer the power question – who is really in charge? Not on the “bad” days where you feel like you need a rock/refuge, but on your best day, when you might be tempted to chalk it up to yourself.

Notice what happens next READ 33-44

Pharaoh references God as well. Did Joseph rub off on him.

38 – We need a person who has the Spirit of God39 – We need to see God at work

Joseph’s position escalates really quickly – READ 45-49

It’s not wrong to say that Joseph becomes in so many ways thoroughly Egyptian. He had a coveted Egyptian job, receives an Egyptian name and Egyptian wife + in-laws. He lives in an Egyptian world. Just when you think, it’s going to be all about Egypt for Joseph going forward, you get minor and major clues that God is up to something.

When you read in 49 about grain being like “sand of the sea,” that’s been said before in Genesis. Abraham heard that from God about his descendants in Genesis 22. And Joseph’s dad Jacob mentions that in Genesis 32. This is talking about grain, but we make the connection.

But there’s something else that gets my attention. So, when it came to Joseph’s name change, he didn’t have a choice. When it came to his marriage, I don’t think he had a choice. But, when it comes to naming his kids, he makes a very decisive choice.

READ 50-52

Just when you might think Joseph would become 100% Egyptian, you hear Hebrew names. Joseph is who He is, and by God’s grace he passes that down to his family.

Manasseh (51) – God helped him move on. Not that he’s forgetting the family, but he’s choosing (with the help of God) to move past the hardship, and by giving this name still choosing to identify himself with the covenant God has made with his family.

Ephraim (52) – He views his life as fruitful because of God. Wherever the land of affliction is, God had blessed Joseph.

On this idea of being fruitful. God promised this to Abraham in Genesis 17. Isaac passed this blessing on to Jacob in Genesis 28 (same word). Do you appreciate how we have these clues.

I think Joseph helps us wrestle with

The IDENTITY question – WHO AM I?

At the height of your power, accolades, control, approval, security, influence, accomplishment, when success comes your way, at the core of who you are, how do you really see yourself? Do you change?

For Joseph – I am a Hebrew. My family received promises. God set his love on us. He is walking with me through this, working for my good.

Again, I just can’t get past the perspective of Joseph.

He always seems to be thinking and saying, “What is God doing here? HE is the main character, and my life is identified with Him.” He has the boldness to say it, even in circumstances where it would seem out of place. And long after these rulers of Egypt were a memory, the names of these sons live on.

It's worth digging in here a bit. If success begins to change who you are at your core. If I begin to change, if I need that success to feed who I am and say what's important about me, what happens when it is stripped away. Because frankly, there's a high likelihood it will be.

I am guessing that for many, you would be like me, you would say, “I follow Jesus. I am a Christian.” But, I also know that functionally it can be so tempting to make so many other things

High school – Is it about being homecoming court, MVP on the court, field, most likely to succeed, valedictorian?

Grown up version – Best grandmother, #1 in sales, chairman of this, highest ____, the one everyone can count on. Over time, it’s almost like you take that on as an identity.

When life strips things away. When life has taken more than it gives. What is your identity? God gave Joseph so much grace. And God hasn’t suddenly become stingy, he will help you settle in to the truth.

God loves you deeply. Jesus proved that love by his life, his death, and through his resurrection, You are his, his child, his servant, his treasure, He is yours, your joy, peace, your everything, He has walked me through all sorts of things with you, given you so much more than you deserved. Take everything else away. That is who you are.

We need the “this-is-who-you-are” reminders.” It’s a reason we gather weekly. That’s a pipeline of grace to us. A major part of our meeting on Sundays, is to mark ourselves out as the Lord’s, no one else’s.

We sing His praise. We sing the gospel. We pray in Jesus’ name.We take the Lord’s Supper, because we are in communion with Him.We baptize in the name of Father, Son and Spirit. We are his.We gather with other believers in smaller groups.We let 100 small decisions and some really big ones signal, that we are in a covenant relationship (we’ve made a binding promise to follow Jesus, no turning back). He won’t turn on us.

We come together as a community of Jesus here at Brainerd

We do live in our own “Egypt.” Egypt redefines boundaries, can call things right that are biblically wrong, celebrate attitudes and beliefs that are completely opposite to the fruit of the Spirit. But our identity is shaped by God. That’s who we are. That’s whose we are. That is our identity.

READ 53-57

This feels like it could be the wrap up to what is almost a fairytale. It’s the guy/gal who was a nobody, invents a product, hits a bunch of home runs, creates a masterpiece, forever enjoys the fame, riches, power that goes along with it. Joseph is large and in charge. He has made it, living his best life. Or is he?

I want to challenge you to look deeper, and with that I have one more question. At the height of everything (power, approval, security, influence, accomplishment)

The ultimate question – What is my end goal?

What tells you that your story has reached its ultimate fulfillment.

For Hollywood, it all could end in Genesis 41. See, in Genesis, Joseph’s life has a much greater future. For Joseph, if it had always been about being “big stuff” in Egypt and that was all that life was about, that would’ve been settling for an appetizer. We're just getting started with God going over the top in showing his grace and power, especially where it counts.

Restored relationships with this family of promise (although Joseph is wildly successful, God is doing something more). God keeping his promises. God working through this family.

Full benefits of reconciliation to build the people of God together. God bringing a father/son back together. God using a family to make his name known. God putting mercy and forgiveness on display. God healing hearts. God making things new.

God plays for keeps. God will grow his people and prepare them to live in the Promised Land. Somehow, Joseph seems to get it.

Genesis 41 is nowhere close to the end of the story. The high drama is truly just beginning. We have to be reminded of the big story here. Your life and your story are about more than your earthly success. Earthly success may be a chapter, but it just isn’t everything.

I wonder what you envision as the “ultimate destination” for you (not Caribbean, Hawaii, Venice)?

A vision for your life. What you think it’s all about.

Could your sights be set too low, maybe? Valedictorian, a ton of followers on some platform, strangers taking note of you. Christmas card that says “we’re the perfect family.” Is it an image you carefully curate, a lifestyle you can keep up, retiring with a number in an account, everything that says “you made it.”

Can I challenge you to lift your eyes to something much higher, much more eternal?

The day we meet the Lord. Pouring out our lives for Him, longing to see him face-to-face, knowing that even when we fell, he picked us back up.

To say with Paul – 7I have fought the good fight, I have finished the race, I have kept the faith. 8There is reserved for me the crown of righteousness, which the Lord, the righteous Judge, will give me on that day, and not only to me, but to all those who have loved his appearing.

At one level this story could seem very complete, but in Genesis, Joseph’s life has a much greater future. We can ask the Lord to lift our eyes up and see not so much WHAT is my end goal, but WHO my end goal really is.

ConclusionI keep seeing parallels in this chapter (that cannot be an accident), and I will close our time with one. Notice the scenario

All the world has a life threatening issue. The whole world.

God brings salvation through one person. A Hebrew who has been rejected, betrayed and falsely accused, robe stripped away and humiliated

One who would be faithful in what God has called him to do, and bless others as he does it

Once humiliated, but now exalted and lifted up, robes of glory, and is the Savior of the world.

What is my end goal? He is!

Closing Prayer

<><><><><>

9.7.2025  Brainerd  (Sunday AM)