NOT A STRAIGHT LINEGOD’S GOOD PLANGENESIS 49:29-50:26

Series Slide  If there was a category for reading books and articles about funeral processionals, burial rituals, I’m pretty sure I would score higher than average in that category of reading. I am guessing that I might’ve been around those sorts of processionals and burials more than most.

And so as I read our passage of Scripture today, I found myself really interested because we come to the end of Jacob’s life, and Joseph’s life. It has been anything but a straight line.

READ Genesis 49:29-50:13

A few observations on what we just read:

So much detail on the purchase, the land, the transaction: This place in the Promised Land is where the family of Abraham belongs

How deeply Joseph and Jacob were respected

“Gathered to His people” means they were not cut off (even in death). This early in the Old Testament, you don’t have as much clear teaching in the Bible about the afterlife, but you do have some hints

This is a very human story: death, grief, burial, rituals are significant. Part of being a loving community means we work hard to love each other through seasons of grief.

But, what happens after someone dies? Almost always there is a lot that is up in the air. Significant questions come.

Material questions – who gets what? That can really be sweet, and it can really go sideways

Relationship questions – will the family hold together? A matriarch, a patriarch who always brought the family together is gone, what now. Will the family get even closer, will it fall apart or drift apart

All that is on the table in the last 13 verses of Genesis. And this isn’t just any family. It’s the family we’ve been tracking since Genesis 12.

Look at Genesis 50:14-20

Verses 19-20 are some of the most beautiful in the Bible, and I am asking you to really sit with the perspective of Joseph and his brothers, and ask ourselves the good/hard questions

The brothers response isn’t that surprising. And many are convinced that they likely fabricate the conversation with dad. But, it seems like they don’t know who they’re dealing with.

More than just being resilient, Joseph lives with a “double story”

On one hand, there’s the story of brothers who did plan evil, you meant it for evil

It really happened – there is no minimization, excuses, no softening

There were harmful plans, schemes with evil motivation – that’s the story that seems to be out of my control

Martin Luther – though this world with devils filled should threaten to undo us

But that story doesn’t have to have the final word. Because on the other hand there is a story being written which is so much greater and more important, God didn’t just balance out the evil, but he was sovereign over it

God planned just how far the evil would go, oversaw how it would be turned back, mastered the evil, utilized it to accomplish something permanently good

God achieved great results – we all survived, we were preserved

Joseph didn’t lose sight of that double story. I don’t know how Joseph got there to that perspective. It has to come with some deep wrestling, some unanswerable questions

God authors blessing and lifeGod doesn’t author evil, but he uses evil for good, for divine purposes.

Frankly, I don’t see a quick-and-easy formula for how you get there. Deep work of the Spirit of God. But it is possible.

A crucial part of the Christian faith (at the cross) Acts 2:23-24

23Though Jesus was delivered up according to God’s determined plan and foreknowledge, lawless people nailed him to a cross and killed him. 24God raised him up, ending the pains of death, because it was not possible for him to be held by death.A DOUBLE STORY

All of us have to wrestle through how we process evil, when it comes into our space, when it ruins things that are good, when it takes things that matter, when it threatens people we love.

Where do you see a double story being written in your life?

Would it be a significant step forward for you not to live in denial that something bad happened; face some things head on: setbacks, trouble, discouraging situations; deep wounds, scars, pain.

Would it be a massive step forward for you to begin to see God having good plans. Another story being written

Other people live, experience joy by a story of seeing God at work – if you don’t see it now, are you open to it. Could friends join you in processing, praying and listening.

Joseph has a certain vantage point for this double story, but what about the brothers and their perspective…they have all kinds of concerns

15“If Joseph is holding a grudge against us, he will certainly repay us for all the suffering we caused him.”17remember what dad said….Please forgive your brothers’ transgression and their sin—the suffering they caused you.’17what we’re asking…please forgive the transgression of the servants of the God of your father.”18His brothers also came to him, bowed down before him, and said, “We are your slaves!”

Summarize – All the insecurities, fear, shame/guilt have piled up. They likely had become overwhelming to them. Some of you feel this as well

Joseph’s response. He weeps. Finish what Joseph said.

21Therefore don’t be afraid. I will take care of you and your children.” And he comforted them and spoke kindly to them.

This response is over the top. Two times he tells them not to be afraid. He’s concerned about their fears.

Add to that – I will take care of you. I assume responsibility. I will take care of your children. It will be a joy to provide for you.

Add to that – He comforted them. He spoke kindly. No distance, no arms-length. Could they have needed anything more?

A verse like this is meant to find a stubborn, calloused, hard heart and just take a jackhammer to it

More than just finding some closure, the brothers experience EXTRAVAGANT GRACE

This is one of those moments, when all you felt like you could ask for is not being written off, that would be mercy

Parable Jesus shares in Luke 15. A son who shakes down his father, gets what he wants, leaves, sins deeply, realizes who he has become, makes his way back home, has all sorts of concerns as to what his dad’s reaction would be. But he’s met by extravagant grace. No harsh reprimand, no “I told you so,” no probationary period to see if he really means it, only grace. It’s time to welcome.

How has extravagant grace met you? Has it?

On a human level, it is so, so humbling. Scripture could not be clearer:

Language of scripture: Record of sin stands against us, against God we have sinned, we are doomed/unclean, wages of sin is death, separated from God, we killed the king of glory. We could go on.

Salvation is a helpful, beneficial transaction, but it’s so much more

More than not being charged, or getting our record cleared – Jesus sees to it that your record is one of complete righteousness, the number of times Jesus did the right thing, that’s in your account

More than a fresh start – Jesus sees to it that you become a deeply loved family member, welcomed, that’s his love for you

More than just starting at neutral, or reset to zero mistakes made, Jesus initiates a relationship where you are trusted, gifted, with a purpose going forward, that’s your future

More than just choosing to go our separate ways, God initiates close relationship, called a friend. That’s your permanent status.

You may not believe that yet, but that is the good news that doesn’t just set us up for heaven, but gives us life and relationship right now

If you asked me what is your big prayer for Brainerd, this is what I would say: God would use Brainerd so that more and more people would experience and enjoy all the grace that God has for them in Jesus Christ. That’s my prayer.

Let’s keep reading

22Joseph and his father’s family remained in Egypt. Joseph lived 110 years. 23He saw Ephraim’s sons to the third generation; the sons of Manasseh’s son Machir were recognized by Joseph. 24Joseph said to his brothers, “I am about to die, but God will certainly come to your aid and bring you up from this land to the land he swore to give to Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob.” 25So Joseph made the sons of Israel take an oath: “When God comes to your aid, you are to carry my bones up from here.” 26Joseph died at the age of 110. They embalmed him and placed him in a coffin in Egypt.

These are such serious moments. “I am about to die.”

A bit of a tension – wrapping up (26), he lives right. This is the way to die right. Joseph begins to take care of things. He calls the family in.

In a way, things don’t wrap up, and the story isn’t even close to over, because Joseph recognizes that even as he dies, he is part of a family, and a story that will not die. Egypt isn’t the home of this family. They are meant to go to the Promised Land. Unlike Jacob, Joseph says leave me here now, but don’t leave me here forever.

When Joseph starts talking about his final resting place, he’s not being superstitious (I’ve seen some of that around death). I think he is communicating about some of the promises that have shaped his life. It was so important for Joseph to communicate “We have a God.” A God who has purposes and plans, that encompass our lives, but not just our lifetime.

more than just dying peacefully, Joseph passes on living hope

In 24 God will certainly come to your aid [God Himself]

Come to your aid = Visit, change fortunes, watch over, be concerned about you, single you out

Out of this land, into the place he promised [something very real and tangible]

There becomes a running list, a generational commitment by God to bless [Abraham, Isaac, Jacob]

Joseph hardwires a reminder for generations that follow him that God has more in store.

And then one day it happens: God does come to their aid. Almost 400 years later, God speaks to a man named Moses and Moses leads them out through God’s miraculous hand.

Exodus 13:19 – Moses took the bones of Joseph with him, because Joseph had made the Israelites swear a solemn oath, saying, “God will certainly come to your aid; then you must take my bones with you from this place.”

God continues to come to their aid – Red Sea, Fire/Cloud, Mt Sinai, thirsty, hungry, Canaan. And in Joshua 24 – Joseph’s bones are finally buried.

God finishes what He starts. But, it’s so telling to me that Joseph not only has that faith, but for generations it affects and has an impact others.

Heb 11:22 By faith Joseph, as he was nearing the end of his life, mentioned the exodus of the Israelites and gave instructions concerning his bones.

Of all the things that he could be remembered for, this is the moment.

Where do you find your HOPE?  Is it found in Jesus? Is it?

Our faith may not have the centuries-long impact that Joseph’s had. Let’s be realistic, you can’t really speak to things 400 years ahead (in the 2400’s). There was one Joseph.

But, then again, to be fair, there’s only one you. And what does that mean for your own faith in Jesus. You have your own set of relationships and connections and you’re going to use words (speaking, typing) and those words could potentially move someone toward the things that matter.

Your walk with the Lord, one foot in front of the other. In the pit, out of the pit, in the valley, on the mountain. You don’t lose heart, and one day faith becomes sight, and we will always be with the Lord.

We’re confident, we have that hope and we pass that hope along.

CONCLUSION

Joseph is such a preview of when God comes to the aid of his people once again. You find it again.

It’s not just Moses and the Exodus, God comes in the flesh, Jesus is born in the very land that Jacob and Joseph keep talking about.

Jesus came to save, came to rescue, He came to his own people, but was rejected by his own

Just like Joseph he was stripped of his garments. Seemed like hope was lost.

Just like Joseph Jesus was condemned on false charges, and took punishment that wasn’t his to take.

Just like Joseph, Jesus was forsaken by people who should've received and helped him.

We’ve read of the death of Jacob and Joseph, and Jesus tasted real death. Heart stopped, breathing finished. No pulse, no breath, no life.

But the parallels end there. Jesus did something far more than Joseph.

Jesus rising from the dead. He came to the aid of heartbroken disciples, men and women who thought he was the one.

He ascends to heaven where he oversees the expansion of his church, and the prayers of his people. Should we face death, and we find ourselves absent from the body, we will immediately be present with the Lord.

And we will come to our aid once more. He will return personally and visibly for us. Of course He would. We’re his.

The first book of the Bible ends with people waiting on God’s timing to be led back to the Promised Land. The last book of the Bible ends with the church saying, “Come Lord Jesus.” And Jesus saying “Yes I am coming soon.”

We end this series knowing that our lives will not be a straight line, and this world can be a crooked place, but God is faithful, and we have Jesus Christ our living hope.

<><><><><>

10.19.2025  Brainerd  (Sunday AM)