BOOKMARKA W A K E N I N GIsaiah 40

Some things when you take a closer look just DO NOT look that great. They’ve been oversold [vacation home, tourist attraction, product or a store]. It turns out to be older, smaller, unremarkable.

Some things when you take a closer look actually get better, more impressive. “I could come back here again and again.”

We will look at one of those passages in the Bible that you will want to come back to again and again. It will get better and better to you. It’s Isaiah 40. I am sure many of you know it. It’s a passage I would like for you to have BOOKMARKED [title slide].

READ Isa 40:27-31 à then back to the title slide

I’ve had so many encounters whether it’s in my office or in homes that are in this space: Not just that times are hard. It’s the fact that a relationship with God is struggling because of difficulty.

There’s confusion: It’s like God doesn’t see what’s happening. There’s distance: I pray but he’s not acting. I feel like I am almost dismissed. Those words, in my experience, are never said casually.

If that’s you (and likely someday it could be you), this will be a passage to bookmark. A lot of us live in the land of Isaiah 40:27.

At first, what’s articulated sounds a bit like a theology issue – My way is hidden from the Lord?

Our WAY = The paths of my life, journey, behavior, how I am doing life

Theology = Can God really see? What do we really believe about his capabilities? What is his nature?

But it’s deeper, isn’t it. The issues are actually experience issues. What should my relationship with God be like? God just doesn’t exactly feel present. He doesn’t seem close.

Unresolved situation at work (short end)family issues (I’m taken advantage of)stressful things (they keep piling up, instead of lightening up)Series of changes have taken us by surprise.

Instead of God hearing, I feel like I am dismissed. We’re pulled into the legal world (dispute, judgment, decision, claim). Why does my case keep getting dismissed? Why does God pass over this, not stopping?

This isn’t just any God. I am being ignored by MY God. Does he care about me? Is there a good/evil, right/wrong in this world? Is there any reason why I should keep hoping.

God addresses these BIG issues His people are struggling with. He doesn’t hide. Read carefully! He’s the one raising the issue! Why are these thoughts going through your head? Gentle rebuke, needed reminder.

It’s personal to him: names (in verse 27), names attached to stories/history. Jacob / Israel – Ups and downs of the middle of Genesis; Jacob’s conniving and being deceived; Jacob’s wrestling.

I know your story/case. I know it backwards and forwards. I can see exactly what’s going on. Why are you putting things together the way you have been.

Probably a decent place to stop and ask where you and God are. As you read, you see the Lord peeling things back. Will you let him go there? It’s easy to stop, pout, hurt, complain. But at some moment, will we let God talk to us? Will we listen?

Notice the questions in 28 – Their issues aren’t ignored and they have not been dismissed.

Relearn what you already know (I don’t sense an eyeroll)Rehear what you already have heard (not a sarcastic smirk)

There are teachers that get so frustrated at having to repeat themselves. But, there are others, if you go to them with a legitimate question, “We did go over this. You have worked through this. I know you know this.”

These words are said with compassion and encouragement, even though they’re still very firm. That’s the voice we’re meant to hear.

It’s wise for us to understand some dynamics

Satan is so deceitful, and will undermine what you know to be truthWorld preaches a message that is so counter, it makes you ask questions you really know the answer toFlesh is so weak and unsettling, we begin to find ourselves in doom loops of thinking and doubting, even though we know better.

We need the review.  So, even if this is review, it’s healthy review for us. What if we actually wake up.

Have you woken someone up recently. Sometimes they’re a little groggy. Sometimes you have to speak a few words to get them oriented. What if we had an awakening. What if we

WAKE UP TO HOW GREAT GOD REALLY IS

This is the message of the WHOLE chapter. It’s pulling them out of their circumstances, and moving their attention to the Lord. It’s beautiful, it’s defining, it’s serious, it’s helpful.

The entire chapter is bundled up into verse 28. So, let’s unpack it.

With respect to TIME, the Lord is great. He’s Everlasting. And he just doesn’t change. This whole chapter preaches this message.

6“All humanity is grass, and all its goodness is like the flower of the field. 7The grass withers, the flowers fade when the breath of the Lord blows on them; indeed, the people are grass. 8The grass withers, the flowers fade, but the word of our God remains forever.”

With respect to the SCOPE of what He is in charge of, He is the great Creator God who has made everything in the whole earth. When you make everything, what creative energy do you have, how much glory should you be given? The main comparison is God bursting with creative energy compared to idols, which seems so ridiculous.

19Something that a smelter casts and a metalworker plates with gold and makes silver chains for? 20A poor person contributes wood for a pedestal that will not rot. He looks for a skilled craftsman to set up an idol that will not fall over.

Look at the greatness of the Lord’s ENDURANCE/ENERGY (never weary)

He’s never frustrated in exercising his power. Doesn’t have to abandon or postpone initiatives for capacity or rest – I guess we’ll just have to finish things tomorrow.”

All the ways this chapter stresses the capacity of the Lord

12Who has measured the waters in the hollow of his hand or marked off the heavens with the span of his hand?

26Look up and see! Who created these? He brings out the stars by number; he calls all of them by name. Because of his great power and strength, not one of them is missing.

How great is he? Could we wake up to that?

The end of the verse differs a little. “There is no limit to his understanding.” You could investigate this all day long, completely max this out, and you will find WISDOM that’s unfathomable

God knows all the scenarios, all the endgames, ahead of them all

So, when you start running into complex, unresolved issues, and you’re tempted to be frustrated with God, is it not highly likely that the issue might be our understanding.

I am not sure any of us appreciate fully how AI works. His discerning and decision-making model can’t improve. He is working on an eternal, universal, tireless scale. Listen

13Who has directed the Spirit of the Lord, or who gave him counsel? 14Who did he consult? Who gave him understanding and taught him the paths of justice? Who taught him knowledge and showed him the way of understanding?

Motyer  – His ways belong to eternity, we to time; his vision is for the world, we are local; his ceaselessness keeps him always ahead of the point we have reached.

What if we could wake up to how great God really is. This wouldn’t be good news just to know the greatness of God. But this passage says more

WAKE UP TO HOW SIGNIFICANT WE ARE TO HIM

29He gives strength to the faint and strengthens the powerless.

God shares his strength, his power, his capacity. He gives, he enters the mess. Not just one and done. He gives and he gives and he gives strength.

Which does mean that we matter to Him. God makes it HIS interest to see to it that we are strength receivers. Who are WE?

Does this say that we are the elite, the scholarship contenders?

Some you get just for breathing, or being a resident here/there, or checking whatever box

Some are competitive – have the community service, articulate

“highly competitive” – someone’s getting it, but it’s probably not going to be you. Message is clear – we’re picking people who are impressive, people who’ve earned the gift.

Look at v29 This goes in a different direction. He gives HIS strength to

“the faint” – failure under life’s pressures. Life got too tough, too hard, there were some glitches, some moments, and you couldn’t rise to meet the occasion.

mid-life crisis, aging, parenting, being single, career, physically

The “powerless” – even more honest about this – power, durability and stability, you never really had it in unlimited quantities. You were going to fail. Not because you’re bad, but because you’re human.

If you zoom out, that really is our condition in every way

Especially when it comes to saving our souls, making ourselves clean, restoring a relationship with God, stopping our self-destructive tendencies

We are powerless, and we need Jesus to act on our behalf

We’re powerless, but he went to the cross – atone, cover, payHe rose from the dead – defeat death, sin, devilHe reigns as Lord and judge

We may need some new ears to hear this. Help us, Lord.  I want us to be resilient. We need it. But the issue is where does the strength come from.

Especially in America, so many of the stories we enjoy celebrate a character who doesn’t need anyone, they just have to look deep, “You have it, you’re enough.” Until you aren’t.

Maybe you bend, you break. Maybe you’re saying, “It’s never happened to me.” I surely wouldn’t wish that on anyone in this room. And yet, these things happen, and they hurt.

So, how does that look like? Rushing in to make tomorrow possible is one who didn’t need you to be all-world.

Your story, you having the strength you need mean a lot to him (don’t get the wrong idea about him). I believe it would just honor the Lord so much for us to pass along our strength-stories.

We can awaken to how significant we are to him. Not just in theory

Look at the contrast in 30. There are those who run out of gas

30Youths may become faint and weary, and young men stumble and fall,

Youth are the people with energy; Young Men are the choice people (athletes, military, best and the brightest). Here’s what happens. They grow faint and weary – inner resources are getting depleted. They stumble and fall – exposed, embarrassed, hurt, disabled, set back

On the other hand,

31those who trust in the Lord will renew their strength; they will soar on wings like eagles; they will run and not become weary, they will walk and not faint.

Remember who he is talking to: the ones who feel like he’s distant, not there when they need him – why is it going like this. They’ve complained. He’s reminded them of what they already knew, and spoke to them about what they already had heard. These are the faint and powerless, and God draws near. In this, we can

WAKE UP TO HOW WE RECEIVE THE HELP HE GIVES

He gives strength. But, this zeroes in on the ones who receive that strength. “Those who trust in the Lord.”

Not through formulas, rituals, milestones, perfect attendance at church, generous giving records. Not through performance-based metrics that prove you have what it takes. It really is a gift.

The word is not the usual word for trust. It’s a loaded word. It speaks of a choice. When faced with being torched, blown out, they trust/wait/hope. So many layers to this word: again it might be worth jotting down.

1 – Certainty – audacious certainty; we can say TRUST in the Lord. So much substantiates this (promises, character, past, presence). I can rely, I can rest, I can depend. I won’t be disappointed. There is renewal.

2 – There is time that elapses between now, and the certain thing I am counting on. And so there is patient waiting. This may take some time. So, I wait on the Lord. God renews.

Layer 3 – there’s expectancy, there’s optimism, there’s hope (there is something certainly good on the horizon and I just can’t wait for it)

They wait/trust/hope in the Lord.

The Lord who pardons, brings nightmare scenarios to an end (2)The one who shows his strength (10-11)

10See, the Lord God comes with strength, and his power establishes his rule. His wages are with him, and his reward accompanies him. 11He protects his flock like a shepherd; he gathers the lambs in his arms and carries them in the fold of his garment. He gently leads those that are nursing.

The one who protects his flock – The one who leads his lambs, especially the vulnerable

Because of who God is, because of this deep dependence on Him, something changes, is altered, replaced, renewed. Notice the progression

Superhuman – soaring, growing wings (above things); unusual strength that helps you fly. But if that seems beyond your imagination

Above average – you’re running, (everyone gets tired, they’re still running)

They will run and NOT grow weary (where normally life’s pressures wear you down), but God shares his strength

Human – walking, when everyone else would be so weary, they’d quit. They will walk and NOT faint (fatigue didn’t have the final word). God has shared his strength

CONCLUSION

We’ve been given some of the best kinds of wake-up calls today

Wake up to how great God really is. More impressed, more in awe.

Wake up to how significant we are to him. More thankful than ever before, more aware of HIS recognition of our condition.

Wake up to how we receive the help he gives. Monitoring our heart even more closely to see how we’re relying, how we’re trusting, how we’re waiting.

<><><><><>

4.06.2025    Brainerd  (Sunday AM)