NOT A STRAIGHT LINEGETTING GROCERIES, SETTING THE TABLESelected Scriptures from Genesis

INTRO – There’s a saying that’s probably familiar: “the shortest distance between two points is a straight line.” But, what you quickly discover is that LIFE ISN’T ABOUT STRAIGHT LINES.

The Bible help us see this. I’m drawn to one story in particular.

A story that has the potential to help us make sense of a crazy world, to not lose heart when there are worldwide catastrophes.

Help keep us from making foolish mistakes. Help us think through what to do when we’ve made a foolish mistake.

What do we do when we are the victims of injustice or the ones who cause injustice? What do we do when we can’t change things, what happens when we can?

It’s the story of JOSEPH which is anything but a straight line [series slide].

When I read these chapters, they’re like that movie I could watch 100 times and still be interested. Scenes, lines, plot-twists you appreciate even more when you know they’re coming. I want to dive in but before you can cook, you have to get groceries. Before you eat, you set the table. So, let’s do some of that. Let’s get to know Joseph’s family.

How far do you need to go back to understand someone? How many generations to appreciate the choices they have to make, the personalities they have, the opportunities given, the struggles/skills they develop

Parents (biological/foster/adoptive), grandparents, great grandparents?

It’s a little easier question to answer with Joseph. If it’s been a while since you’ve heard this story…To understand Joseph, you have to start with his great grandfather, Abraham, and to get to know the family of Abraham is to appreciate the fact that God gave BIG PROMISES to Abraham and this family again and again. I could’ve picked Gen 15, 18, 22 to read:

Genesis 12:1–3 1The Lord said to Abram: Go from your land, your relatives, and your father’s house to the land that I will show you. 2I will make you into a great nation, I will bless you, I will make your name great, and you will be a blessing. 3I will bless those who bless you, I will curse anyone who treats you with contempt, and all the peoples on earth will be blessed through you.

The promises are of descendants becoming a nation, blessing directly from God. Other places add a large piece of land – God’s people in God’s land under God’s rule and blessing. These promises are repeated to Joseph’s great grandfather Abraham and they seem so straightforward, a straight line, if you will.

But, this story is about humans, which means it’s all over the place. With this story you have family dysfunction getting more complicated with every generation, but you also have a very persistent God who shows favor to those who don’t deserve it.

God gave Abraham promises – Here’s a major problem with the promises – Abraham and his wife Sarah can’t have kids…for decades – what do the promises of multitudes of descendants mean if they can’t have kids?

The Lord is faithful to his promises, and eventually, Abraham and Sarah do have Isaac, but only after a lot of painful circumstances and decisions where Abraham tried to play God, take matters in his own hands – it really didn’t work out well, never does.

Abraham is promised to be the father of a great multitude, but as his life ends, he really only has one son who is in line with the promises he received. Not really a great nation, just one person.

Isaac is Joseph’s grandfather. He receives the same kinds of promises

26:3–4 – I will be with you and bless you. For I will give all these lands to you and your offspring, and I will confirm the oath that I swore to your father Abraham. I will make your offspring as numerous as the stars of the sky, I will give your offspring all these lands, and all the nations of the earth will be blessed by your offspring,

Isaac receives major promises. Here’s the issue: his family blows up. There is deep division. A deep family rupture

Isaac and his wife Rebekah have twins, Jacob and Esau. But it’s clear that Isaac has a favorite – Esau. And Rebekah has a favorite – Jacob. That blows up the family. Jacob (with his mom’s help) outmaneuvers his brother and his dad, and gets the major portion of the inheritance, estate, blessing. Emotions and bitterness are all over the place, Esau threatens to kill Jacob, Jacob leaves, and finds his own way.

Promises to Abraham and Isaac (land, blessing, people/nation), but at this point we just have Jacob on the run. Great nation was the promise, but here we are at a 3rd generation, and there is one man.

That brings us to Jacob, Joseph’s father. What’s going on there – a lot. Let’s talk about that Jacob’s family situation.

Relationship with his dad – not great, because he wasn’t the favorite, and tricked his dad into getting the estate.

Who was Jacob’s wife?

Yeah, so with the custom of the time, Jacob found a distant relative named Rachel, he loved her so much he agreed to a deal with her dad to work for her for 7 years to marry her, only to be tricked. Rachel’s dad, says actually you have to marry Leah, the firstborn, first, but if you want to work another 7 years, (2018-2032) you can have Rachel now. He does (Leah), but don’t you think that goes to work on you. How do holidays go with that family? Rachel’s relationship with her dad, Jacob’s relationship with her dad, Leah and Jacob, Leah and Rachel.

It’s all just a mess. We don’t have a million details, but we don’t have to. Complicated relationships. Deep deception. There are victims to these kinds of situations. You live in the world where people aren’t honest. Family secrets are hidden and they hurt. It seems like there are rarely clear cut winners. A lot of people lose something that matters.

Remember Jacob loves Rachel, but she can’t have kids (Genesis 29-30). So many stories in the Bible where people walk the path of infertility.

By God’s design, Leah begins to have children. Reuben, Simeon, Levi, Judah. This plays out over years.

Rachel gives her servant, Bilhah (not a full wife), and she has kids (Dan and Naphtali). But, that will hardly ease Rachel’s pain.

Leah gives her servant, (Zilpah) and she has kids. Gad, Asher

Leah has more children – Issachar, Zebulun, Dinah

It’s madness – 4 women, 3 moms, 11 kids, multiple layers of problems upon problems. How is any day normal? As we’re reading, weeks are turning into months. Months are turning into years. Poor choices can have a lingering effect (untangling Christmas lights).

Eventually, God intervenes and gives Rachel a child (Joseph). There is such a relief, even in how the story is written. It’s relieving and yet more complicated. Rachel even has one more child – Benjamin, and dies in labor. How that must’ve broken Jacob’s heart.

Where is Jacob with God in all this – it’s complicated. Jacob often seems to be in total survival mode (Unprincipled high-stakes gambler that’s likely to make a truck load of money, but life will be a mess).  There is another side. He receives visions and direct promises from God.

28:12–15 – And he dreamed: A stairway was set on the ground with its top reaching the sky, and God’s angels were going up and down on it. The Lord was standing there beside him, saying, “I am the Lord, the God of your father Abraham and the God of Isaac. I will give you and your offspring the land on which you are lying. Your offspring will be like the dust of the earth, and you will spread out toward the west, the east, the north, and the south. All the peoples on earth will be blessed through you and your offspring. Look, I am with you and will watch over you wherever you go. I will bring you back to this land, for I will not leave you until I have done what I have promised you.”

Jacob wrestles with God (Gen 32). He makes vows to God. He builds altars to God (Genesis 35). He is renamed by God (Israel). Jacob’s children will encounter God and his promises through Him.

That’s the family of Joseph. By the time we pick up the story of Joseph …

Jacob has had multiple encounters with God, something is happening with him. He receives the promises from his father and grandfather.

Joseph is a teenager, and his mom is dead. He does have three step mothers, though. He’s dad’s favorite, which makes him the least favorite with his half-brothers who hate that he’s the favorite. There are strained relationships wherever you look.

How will they ever make this work? Spoiler alert: they don’tWhat good could possible come out of this? We know a lot of pain does.

Sexual sin, failed marriages, infertility, heartache, loneliness, death, betrayal, jealousy, rage, destructive patterns, lies, prolonged disappointment, deceit, foolishness, family meltdowns, hypocrisy

So messy, painful, disturbing, frustrating, wicked, so wrong.

Today isn’t just meant to be your does of biblical ancestry.com lessons for the year. If God could use THEM, maybe just maybe he is abounding in faithful love to thousands of generations.

Rings personally to me. We all have family trees. 6 half-siblings. Both parents we’re married/divorced. Actually both sets of my grandparents divorced. Actually, my dad and mom met at my dad’s mom and my mom’s dad’s wedding. An uncle who stole millions from the family, spent a lot of his adult life in prison. It’s messy.

You don’t feel like you have to hide or pretend. Jesus said that not those who are well but those who are sick are the ones who need a doctor.

I expect God to feed us through this story, and those are the groceries He’s going to use. Now let’s set the table, okay.

Lord willing, each week, we’re going to come in and dig deeper into this story. I think it will be helpful for you to think in 3 layered perspectives. Each can be God’s grace to us in these stories.

One perspective, one layer is the ANY GIVEN MOMENT perspective

We’re going to track this story, pause, and look at certain moments.

Joseph’s story will cause us to look at a cast of individuals. Men and women. Major characters and minor characters. Look at their traits, their circumstances, their decisions. Right decisions, wrong decisions

I think this is a lot like the STREET VIEW (picture) on a lot of digital maps

This is where we live: you see what’s right in front of you at this moment.

Some of what we read about with Joseph will give you guidance and direction, wisdom, reality-check. You can zero in on yourself.

Where are you in life – teenager, early on, mid-life, old age issues. Sometimes this is going to convict, help, give us a model, cause us to do some soul-searching.

Individual days, decisions, reactions and responses. They count. They begin to add up.

When you read things with the ANY GIVEN MOMENT perspective, it becomes useful to hear…

trust in the Lord, in all your waysWhether you eat or drink or whatever you do

ANY GIVEN MOMENT, Joseph can help us there.

Another perspective would be OVER A LIFETIME – Joseph is one of those characters in the Bible where we go from birth-death. We see God’s plan unfolding over Jacob’s life and Joseph’s life. It reminds us that life is bigger than just this moment.

So, if we get out of street view, and we go up much higher, you begin to see Chattanooga differently. Brainerd is at the middle of this map. All the paths that led you here today. It wasn’t a straight line. You can see so many connections. Winding roads, off of a mountain (orange barrels); follow this road, then you get on this one

Joseph will help us step back and think about what God is doing.

Today’s crisis: Okay, that happened. But be patient.

Verge of divorce – generational impact, graduations, weddings, grandkids birthday parties are going to be affected

first steps of reaching for help – mental illness, eating disorder, life is hard – you know God can walk with you through this

Friendships that will walk you through life.

Realize how much time it takes for things to develop (dangers, toils, snares). It isn’t a straight line. It isn’t just about me, what will make me happy right now and what’s going on right now.

We are affected by others’ decisions and they are affected by ours.

So many little things feed into big things.

Some of these things are going to take a while to see through, and there aren’t guarantees. We know some dimensions of Joseph’s story as history, but he didn’t know them as he was experiencing them.

Many days, we don’t see much bigger of a picture. A lot of the days aren’t recorded. Every day isn’t epic. Most days, we’ll do our jobs, fulfill our roles, try to love our neighbor. Even the mundane days are going to point our lives in a specific direction. They all contribute.

The story of Joseph, over decades, will help us to see

Grace for past mistakesReset where past sins are dealt with and not passed alongReconciliation for major messes (not always, no guarantees)

This perspective can help senior adults to not be bitter, young parents not to give up, teenagers and college students dealing with harsher realities of life, to continue to walk faithfully.

Phil 1:6 – Confident that the one who began a good work will complete it

Psalm 37:25 – I have been young and now I am old, yet I have not seen the righteous abandoned or his children begging for bread.

2 Timothy 4 – I have fought the good fight, finished the race, kept the faith

The last perspective is ALL OF TIME. But it’s all of time PLUS.

How does your lifetime fit into what God is doing eternally! This unfolds over centuries, your story factors into that. Bigger than Joseph/Jacob, or even Abraham. The scale is almost impossible to fathom, but to appreciate God’s work, we need to.

I zoomed out to the globe (SLIDE), and it makes us all feel small.

Think about this. All those promises made to Joseph’s ancestors. By Exodus, 400 years later, Jacob’s kids are now the nation of Israel with hundreds of thousands of people, and are ready to inherit the land that had been promised to them centuries before.

But, it’s even more, God will use this family, in the fullness of time, to bring the Messiah into the world. When you start talking about “all of time,” we’re going to get to Jesus pretty quickly [listen for echoes and rhymes of history]. Even in the story of Joseph, you hear it, don’t you…

Anticipated, beloved Son, walks with the presence and favor of Godhated/betrayed by his ownVindication and Power, yet forgiveness extended to his persecutorsRescuer of the world

Zoom out far enough and we get to the eternal plans of God through the work of Jesus. When we factor that into how we listen and apply God’s Word, it will remind us that while so many things in our world are the same as Joseph’s, one thing has changed. Jesus has come. We can look back to the cross and resurrection, the Spirit poured into our lives, assurance of our forgiveness, hope of a new creation, and those things profoundly shape our lives.

CONCLUSION: Life won’t be straight lines, your life won’t be a straight line, but by faith we can still walk with God, or even begin a walk with God.

Maybe today, you start to believe that maybe God could show you grace. Maybe the mess could work out for your good. Maybe eternity does matter. Or maybe you continue to walk, seeing any given moment in light of a lifetime, and a lifetime in light of eternity.

I want to pray that you will be able to see the different perspectives

<><><><><>

8.10.2025  Brainerd  (Sunday AM)