HOW TO “PRACTICE RIGHTEOUSNESS”HOW TO GIVEMATTHEW 6:1-4

INTRO: Are you a Christian? I know it’s a blunt question., Maybe you feel like it’s a personal question. But, I want to ask you. Are you a Christian?

It’s a different question than asking you’re a churchgoer, an American, whether you’re good to family/friends, whether you pay your taxes.

Do you do things that show you’re a Christian? Again, I know it’s blunt, but to be honest, it’s an important aspect of being a Christian, and something I want to talk about over the next few weeks. Faith without any activity at all would be dead faith. Do you do things that show you’re a Christian?

One way the Bible frames this whole discussion is with the word RIGHTEOUSNESS. God is a righteous God, and part of being His means with your whole person, you live your life with his kingdom as top priority, you do everything you do in His name, to accomplish his complete will in your life.  So if I asked it this way? Do you have the RIGHTEOUSNESS that God requires to be one of his?

Answers: I hope so, I doubt it. I am just not sure. It seems like a lot.

Some might answer: because of who Jesus is, what He did, I believe that I do have the righteousness that God requires.

Ro 5:17 – If by the one man’s trespass [Adam], death reigned through that one man, how much more will those who receive the overflow of grace and the gift of righteousness reign in life through the one man, Jesus Christ.

2 Corinthians 5:21 – [God] made [Jesus] the one who did not know sin to be sin for us, so that in him we might become the righteousness of God.

Some of you are able to say in and through Jesus, I have been given the gift of righteousness. What a gift!!

But righteousness in the Bible is more than a gift, it’s actually something after you’ve been given it, you grow into.

Someone that looks more and more like their dad, and even takes on mannerisms, and speech cadence of their mom

Yes, you have the spiritual DNA (gift of righteousness of Jesus), what if you now you’re taking on more and more of a likeness. You look more and more like Jesus

Righteousness is like that. Faith without works would be dead faith. So, righteousness is something you put into practice. What does that look like?

Jesus taught significantly about righteousness in the most famous sermon ever, what’s been called the sermon on the mount. We have it recorded in Matthew 5,6,7.

We’re going to zero in on Matthew 6, because it really emphasizes practicing righteousness, showing by your actions you’re devoted to God, living out your faith in some key practices.

For those who are Christians, I know this about you, you want more than just some sort of box you check, you want to do righteousness, you know you should do this, so how do you do it?

Our series for the next several weeks will be HOW TO PRACTICE RIGHTEOUSNESS. We’re going to sort through some ways we’re supposed to be putting our faith into practice.

We get a really good pattern laid down in Matthew 6:1

Be careful not to practice your righteousness in front of others to be seen by them. Otherwise, you have no reward with your Father in heaven.

EXPECTATION: “Do righteousness.” True faith drives righteous action. The assumption is that every follower of Jesus has tangible things to point to that say, God’s been at work here. I’m one of his. That’s the expectation.

Look at it again – Be careful not to practice your righteousness in front of others to be seen by them. Otherwise, you have no reward with your Father in heaven.

We have a CAUTION (be careful) Especially as it relates to your “HOW”

Is this mainly going to be about how to do good things IN FRONT OF others to really show you’re on Team Jesus

“Theatrical righteousness” – big display, being concerned with doing dramatically noticeable good. Be careful of this!

Caution – Because the “HOW” says a lot about your “WHY”

So that you can be seen, so that you can be noticed, people really take note of you, are impressed by you.

There’s a different way, a better way. Here’s how you do your best…

Keep doing righteousness, don’t stop, that’s not an option. But be careful – the how communicates a lot about the WHY. Think, evaluate, slow down (caution sign, light’s blinking)

Because if you don’t – you have no reward with your Father in heaven.

REWARD – connected to “WHO” really sees

The stakes – Reward (or no reward) with your Father who is in heaven

We will talk more about the reward, but that’s the pattern of “practicing righteousness” [Expectation, Caution, Reward]. Notice how that applies in some specific ways, this week as Jesus teaches HOW TO GIVE

Other parts of the Bible instruct us on giving that happens with churches, ministries, that fund programming, staff, missionaries, keep lights on. But, this describes something related but a little different, right?

2So whenever you give to the poor, don’t sound a trumpet before you, as the hypocrites do in the synagogues and on the streets, to be applauded by people. Truly I tell you, they have their reward.  3But when you give to the poor, don’t let your left hand know what your right hand is doing,  4so that your giving may be in secret. And your Father who sees in secret will reward you.

This kind of giving is more like charity, to the poor, charitable deeds, those in need, almsgiving, acts of mercy. This giving reflects such deep concern for others, Jesus was like that. Specific aspect of giving.

And yet, let’s not make this “giving” so narrow that it’s only/always about some money being exchanged – any good deed intended to serve others

Notice the EXPECTATION: literally every follower of Jesus can and should practice their righteousness in this way (WHEN you give)

sharing burdens – let me help youlistening – what’s going onpresence – I’m going to come overinclusion – will you join usmeeting needs – I can take care of thatmoney/gift/financial – take this, use this

Result – someone is provided for, loved, cared for

Again, the expectation / assumption – followers of Jesus will DO this, will do this all the time, regular part of our community

Go back to our verses – notice the highlights (trumpets/applauded). It’s sad that something really good can get really sideways.

CAUTION especially as it relates to your “HOW”

Is this mainly going to be about how to give IN FRONT OF others. The trumpet sounds (religious/synagogues, and public/streets). Seems a little comical, maybe it’s exaggerated, but you can’t miss the point. There are going to be showoffs here (hypocrites in v2)

hypocrites (today) – say one thing do anotherhypocrites (actors/actresses) – theatre, playing a role

Action is sending one signal, but the heart isn’t close to being there. A hypocrite is putting on a show for his/her own reasons. That’s a big problem when it comes to righteousness.

Are there more subtle ways?  (Curtis, I’m not blowing trumpets)

Internal soundtrack that sings your praises.  “I’m the one who always helps, who steps up, I hope people appreciate this, the least they could do is say thanks every now and then. But, maybe they don’t even know.

a little obnoxious – person who drops some act of generosity they did into a conversation, and it really just comes out of the blue, and they do it again, it keeps coming up (we know what’s going on)

humblebrag – we feel so blessed, we can just _____

unspoken but real expectations – I am doing this because I expect something in return, not applause but control/power.

Be really cautious because the “HOW” of your giving sure says a lot about your “WHY”

Is this so that you can be seen, applauded, praised? Impressive people impress, and so do you have to hear “what a guy, what an amazing lady, what an awesome family.”

Caution – that’s really all you get. You wanted people to notice. They did. It’s not that you get ZERO reward. You get people to notice. Paid in full. You’ve got all you’re ever going to get. Nothing more is owed to you.

WOW! There IS another way. We have to find it. So, what should we do? Do your best…

Keep doing righteous things, keep giving, – don’t dial back the kindness. “Never stifle a generous impulse.”

AND be careful – the how communicates a lot about the WHY

Try to be modest – there’s an exaggeration (left hand / right hand). Try to be as unself-conscious and unself-impressed as possible. It’s like no one is keeping score, keeping track.

Look for ways to do this as humbly as you can. That’s the way of Jesus.

We don’t have to press this to the unreasonable – never can be thanked, stay away from a meal-train (you’d have to put your name there), never be recognized, nobody can ever clap, should only give cash (so you don’t get make someone print a charitable giving receipt), name never shows up on a list of people who gave

Again, we can be absurd, and get paralyzed. Or we just like to dodge and deflect what it could actually mean for us.

Here’s the point and here’s what we’re called to do: Check your heart. What is your motive? And there really just needs to be ONE.

Scripture – And your Father who sees in secret will reward you.

That’s the REWARD. Who really sees/notices? Your Father will reward you.

It may be lost on us how many times a reward functions as an incentive in Scripture. Maybe in our effort to make everything NOT about works or earning, we lose some motivation that we’re supposed to have.

Not just “I don’t need any attention.” Rather, I want to be doing the right things before my Father. My Father is completely righteous, so generous, merciful, giving. Jesus was so kind, so generous, doing the right thing in the right way. I want the Father to see me growing in that.

The reward is that he really sees.

dazzling and the impressive – he barely notices; “Oh! Really? I must’ve missed Mr BigShot getting celebrated and applauded for giving the BIG IMPORTANT FAMOUS GIFT. That’s nice!”

However, the attempt to care humbly and modestly – it’s a big deal to him!

We’re getting pretty intense here, aren’t we? Maybe as you evaluate, you feel some concern, maybe even some guilt. Brainerd is filled with people who are givers. I know that. But, maybe some alarm bells are sounding.

“I promise I am trying. But I also sometimes make sure I get some credit for things. I bring stuff up in conversation. I keep score too many times.” If that’s you, maybe this helps:

Just as a human father can see the fumbling magic trick his child tries to perform for him, so our Father can see our fumbling attempts to do the "tricks" of modesty and anonymity. And the Father is impressed. Bruner 285

What’s so encouraging to me is that the reward seems to be a deeper relationship/communion w/the Father (v.1 –the reward is WITH THE FATHER in Heaven). That’s the REWARD.

Maybe this helps: It’s awards day. Dad is in the crowd; his daughter receives a reward for _____. The teacher, dean, head of school, whomever says a ton of really nice things about her. It’s an awesome moment.

Would the dad come up, and say, “here’s $500. You earned it for all that stuff.” That’s not quite right, is it? Hug, a few kind words, look her in the eye and say “I could not be more proud of you. I love you.”

What more could she ask for? There’s even greater closeness. Not so much of an impersonal commercial transaction

Here’s the deal. When we talk about rewards. Some of those rewards we’re waiting on (end time, everything is revealed). Final judgment, new heavens and new earth

But, I am also convinced that some of that reward happens now. Kingdom of Heaven has broken through

The Father notices NOW in a personal way, as a living Father.

And what if even now, maybe not as perfectly as we will one day, but even now we get the gift of really sweet communion with our Father. The real sense that are sacrifices are more than worth it. Our efforts to live differently is worth it. The modesty and anonymity, he sees, and knows, and rewards.

What if the reward for now, is the love of God spread in our hearts (Rom 5), the privilege of praying Abba Father (Gal, Rom 8), knowing his love in deeper ways (Ephesians 1)

What a gift!

CONCLUSION

You can relax a bit. Giving isn’t your entry fee into heaven. There’s not a threshold you’re trying to reach by practicing your righteousness. You’re not scraping and clawing to accumulate good-deed points.  You’re not doing good hoping it outweighs any bad. Not the way any of that works at all.

You belong to Jesus. You’re free to see people in need just as our Heavenly Father saw you in deep need. He loved you when you were in spiritual debt. He gave and is giving you more grace and mercy than you could ever exhaust.

You’re free to move toward people in love because you’ve been loved, and because you love the one who loves you so much. You don’t have to worry if everyone notices. Your Heavenly Father sees the dynamic.

So find someone in need, someone to love. Make it a daily assignment, a daily prayer. Lord, show me who needs an act of mercy. And give. Don’t stifle the generous impulse. Be modest. People don’t have to know. But God sees. And oh, the rewards he gives. That’s what you want.

<><><><><>

11.2.2025    Brainerd  (Sunday AM)