CHRIST WAS BORN FOR THISJESUS THE REDEEMERGALATIANS 4:4-6

INTRO: It’s time for your exam. It’s a Christmas Exam. Don’t worry, it’s open Bible. Feel free to have your Bible wide open. The exam is a simple one. It’s going to be a fill in the blank exam.

NOT: Point out inaccuracies in some of the traditional Christmas carols and I won’t ask you about how many characters you can name.

Here’s the exam. One fill in the blank: Christ was born for ___________. That is what I want you to be able to fill in!

Today is week #4 that we’ve spent trying to answer that question on Sundays. We could really spend many, many more weeks. We’ve gone to some amazing places in the New Testament. Some of my favorites

A book of the Bible that reads more like a sermon: Hebrews

Next we read a portion of a letter to a church in a smallish Roman Colony named Philippi in Ancient Macedonia.

Theological biography that a follower of Jesus named John complied

Today, we’ll spend some time in a letter Paul wrote to a group of churches in what is now central Turkey. He had direct contact with them and he had some pretty deep concerns.

We are filling in this blank: Christ was born for _____________.

We won’t trace the whole book, but we will begin in Galatians chapter 4:4

Galatians 4:4–6 4When the time came to completion, God sent his Son, born of a woman, born under the law, 5to redeem those under the law, so that we might receive adoption as sons. 6And because you are sons, God sent the Spirit of his Son into our hearts, crying, “Abba, Father!”

A few things grab you right out of the gateTIMING – “Time came to completion” (fullness of time)

We could speculate on the WHY this timing was so perfect [maybe it was the Roman roads, government etc.]

What we can say: nothing more needed to happen, it couldn’t be improved upon. Everything was in the right place.

God knows everything, this is the right time. This can be hard to process, especially when timing seems off in our own lives

2 situations where: the timing isn’t the greatest, humanly speaking. But God rules over all of that. It isn’t the main point of the passage, but it seems like one of those “extras” we get from it just because.

The timing matters, but also the PROCESS. There is a dual way of talking about what God is doing when Jesus comes (sent/born).

(1) God sent Jesus, God gave Jesus, but we also read that(2) Jesus was born, Jesus came. A child is born, a Son is given.

He was born of a woman = really humanHe was born under the law = really Jewish [which matters, especially if you read Galatians]

The highlight is clear though: God took the initiative. Christ was willing to take on human flesh and be born SO THAT – how do we fill in this blank

5to redeem those under the law, so that we might receive adoption as sons.

Christ was born for this: to redeem you [REDEMPTION]

By redemption, this isn’t the “they all counted me out, after I lost, or after ____, but now I finally got some redemption.”

That’s not exactly it. However, it might be easy to leave this as a religious word. Make sure we appreciate the full dimensions here.

Redemption from slavery – no longer enslaved, but free. Of course, in the Bible, the place we think of as a backdrop for any sort of redemption is Exodus. There’s an evil controlling dictator named Pharoah, God’s people experiencing harsh treatment

Then the plagues, Passover, Red Sea. God’s people are redeemed

That’s the biblical, OT backdrop of redemption, and it makes sense that Paul speaks of redeeming those who are “under the law.”

Especially Jewish way of speaking and helping expose how much we fall short of God’s law that we’re under. We don’t do what God requires.

There’s also the moral will of God (Romans). We all fall short there. And we need redemption.

At just the right time, God acts, and this redemption will go far beyond victory over a ruler over Egypt.

The redemption he’s speaking of is from negative things of this present darkness (world, devil, flesh, death). They become like evil masters holding us captive. Christ was born for redemption

Ephesians 1:7 – In him we have redemption through his blood, the forgiveness of our trespasses, according to the riches of his grace

Titus 2:14 – He gave himself for us to redeem us from all lawlessness and to cleanse for himself a people for his own possession…

Trespasses, sin, lawlessness, just gets passed on, hangs over us like a curse —> fractured relationship with God that has eternal consequences

Galatians 3:13 – Christ redeemed us from the curse of the law by becoming a curse for us.

If you believe yourself to be pretty much faultless with a handful of small flaws that are easily correctable, you have a different salvation plan

You will just always try to make sure you be true to yourself, do enough good, stay ahead of life, give back

If you know the truth, accept what God has to say, the picture is not pretty

full of contradictions, even good things can be done with mixed motives; sometimes going deeper and deeper into being the worst version of yourself; struggling to get a handle on yourself

the people closest to us absorb stuff that they never should have to. There’s just a pile of sins, rebellions, just done the wrong thing.

How desperately we need our lives redeemed! And just to think because of the work of Jesus in one moment, all of the slavery to sin is gone: you’re redeemed, forgiven. Could you ask for more than that?

The cost is so high. Paul and Peter both speak of blood being shed

1 Peter 1:18–19 For you know that you were (not) redeemed from your empty way of life with perishable things like silver or gold, but with the precious blood of Christ, like that of an unblemished and spotless lamb.

It isn’t just a matter of “write the check.” It’s the life of Jesus for us.

Christ loved me and gave himself for me – Gal 2Rev 1 – Jesus freed us from our sins by his blood

That’s you or at least it could be. Imagine the difference that might make for you if you recognized Jesus could redeem you! Could you believe? Could you start or restart on this path of faith?

Christ was born for this [REDEMPTION]

Let’s pause here, because there could be a way of redeeming/releasing a slave, and taking no responsibility for their life in the future (you’re on your own now, buddy. I’ve done something for you, but now carve your own path, figure out a way to make it happen.)

That may work in our mindset or on movie sets. I remind you that this wasn’t exactly a culture where rags to riches stories ever happened.

Everyone hearing Galatians read would’ve been able to articulate that it’s one thing to free someone, but where do they go now. They have no advantages, no privileges, no opportunities, and even their survival wouldn’t even be close to guaranteed.

But this says Jesus redeemed you AND brought you into His family

4God sent his Son, born of a woman, born under the law, 5to redeem those under the law, so that we might receive adoption as sons.

Christ was born for this: ADOPTION

This probably goes without saying, but when you read “adoption of sons” if you are a “daughter” of God not a son, you don’t have to be frustrated by the word choice here. This good news includes you.

Word choice speaks to inheritance rights, status. Galatians 3:28 reminds us that in God’s eyes there aren’t value judgments based on male/female. But “adoption as sons” is used to make sure we ALL understand this is the max benefits that could be given.

If you are relying on Jesus then YOU have been brought in. You are loved and accepted beyond degree.

“WE” might receive – you and me, both of us, all of us who are resting in Jesus. Adoption is God making his people his children.

When the first readers/hearers of Galatians processed Paul’s teaching, it would be a shift from how adoption worked in the Roman world

In Paul’s world, adoption was ordinarily a rich childless couple finding a well behaved young adult male to become an heir and keep the family name. God doesn’t lack something to make Himself complete. Still he loves us, even though he “finds” us while we’re still sinners. And he chooses to love us there. He adopts us.

Can you think of situations where people wait to hear whether they are accepted? College acceptance letters, Promotion, Did you pass the test

A call comes and so does the relief, the joy. Life changes. The future seems very different, because you’re in.

We receive a complete status change – adopted IN JESUS

Eph 1:4–5 For he chose us in him, before the foundation of the world, to be holy and blameless in love before him. He predestined us to be adopted as sons through Jesus Christ for himself.

I am guessing some of you are a lot like me. Way too often my insecurities drive a lot here, and I don’t bring to my mind the status I have of being God’s child. And so my life is filled (and maybe your life is filled)

with comparison and uncertainty about possessions, where you fit

Anxious about friends, money, school, grades, etc. Can you trust God?

Feels as if no one cares about you, or you judge others mercilessly

Lives on a success/fail basis, which means you need to look good, but that doesn’t go so hot, so you feel guilty and condemned

Feels discouraged and defeated, or maybe you try to fake some self- confidence, but in the end, you’re not in a good spot

Could that change if you really appreciated your status? Christ was born for ADOPTION. All of this is more than we could’ve imagined or expected. But, Galatians says one more thing.

Technically, you could make someone an heir, and it just be a legal pronouncement. You could arrange the paperwork, designate someone to be an heir, even surprise them with an estate. Without any connection, except for a legal one.

God the Father, God the Son, God the Spirit don’t opt for that path.

6And because you are sons, God sent the Spirit of his Son into our hearts, crying, “Abba, Father!”

That’s an active ongoing relationship. The personal presence of the Holy Spirit in our lives, activates cries to the Father

Christ was born for ACTIVATION, not just status

In the beginning of Genesis, God breathes into Adam. Adam receives the breath of God, the breath of life. Humans became living, embodied souls.

Life happens. SIN happens, which brings enslavement, brokenness, bondage.

But what we’re reading now is the word of hope. Formerly enslaved, sinful human souls, because of Jesus’ work of redemption and the Father’s choice of adoption, also receive the personal “breath of God” in another powerful way.

God breathes into your life one more time. You are born again, made new, come alive to spiritual things. God sends the Spirit of His Son INTO OUR HEARTS.

Another OT picture helps us: Ezekiel 37 has this picture of a valley where lots of people had died a long time ago. All that’s there are dry bones. Lots of them. God speaks, God breathes, they come alive. It does remind us all that looks can be deceiving when it comes to the powerful word of God.

The same way – We were dead, but God made us alive.

The Spirit of Jesus comes into us, and He activates something. More than:

Capacity for a bunch of better choices and a lot better behaviorIntellectual horsepower to understand deep spiritual truthsMysterious power over dark, supernatural enemies

Yes, but there’s an even better starting point. The Holy Spirit puts on our lips the same cry that Jesus had in the Garden of Gethsemane before He was crucified: Abba, Father.

Abba = Aramaic, Father = Greek. Several scholars pick up that the Abba was likely Jesus’ regular prayer

Is it the Spirit of Jesus crying inside you or YOU crying. Can it be both? I think so.

As far as the relationship, this relationship will not have a feel of Master-Slave. We certainly know our place. He’s God. We’re not!

But prayer isn’t about intimidation where we tiptoe around or feel like we have to try to manipulate a situation for our benefit, kind of like we walk out of the office with a signature we thought would be hard to get.

There is honor on our part, provision/protection/development on his part. There will be an ongoing conversation between God and His children. it’s almost like the Spirit comes into our lives, and the text thread begins

Words of dependence, love, trust and wonderWords of confusion, uncertainty, disappointment, vulnerabilityWords goes even deeper: intimacy, awe, devotion, understanding

It goes on and on into eternity. This is what the Spirit does in our hearts.

CONCLUSION – we’ve spent 4 weeks reminding ourselves that Christ was born for THIS, for these kinds of things!  He doesn’t come for you…

to be thought of as a pretty good guy, a respected ladyto work your hardest to be the best version of yourselfto be 10% more religious in 2026

But for redemption, adoption, and to activate the Spirit’s work in you, God would send His own Son, and Jesus Christ would willing come. This is what Christ was born for.

PRAYER / COMMUNION

<><><><><>

12.21.2025  Brainerd  (Sunday AM)