EASTER 2025RESURRECTION1 Peter 1:3-9

[No title slide today] There’s nothing quite like an eyewitness account. When you know: He was there at DDay. She was at World Trade Center on 9/11.

Intensity, trauma means you remember so much even down to the minute detail. Moments and days immediately after the event, that eyewitness, first-hand testimony is so compelling, and there’s nothing quite like it.

But, there’s also so much value decades later. As time elapses, you gain more perspective. How does this change things for the world? How does it change you? Right after, those are just questions and you have a lot of guesses and speculation.

But over time, life moves on, decades later, there’s a lot more clarity, isn’t there. The event may still be right there, but you have a lot more perspective. This is how I changed. This is how the world changed.

That is really what you get with one of the first followers of Jesus, named Peter. 30-35 years after Jesus Christ died, Peter wrote a letter. And he talks about the death of Jesus, and the resurrection of Jesus in that letter. But he has perspective. What does he believe it all meant, what did it all mean to him personally. We get a little glimpse of it in a letter he wrote

Read 1 Peter 1:3-9

That’s amazing, and it’s also super-dense. This is one run-on sentence (not recommended in English class, but happens a lot in the Bible, okay when you have a lot to say about God). It’s going to take a minute to unpack.

One thing you can pick up on is that 3 decades later, 2 things still blow Peter away

GOD IS MERCIFUL – 1:3 (Because of his great mercy…)

God is moved by the needy, helpless and undeserving. Not driven by paybacks and personal benefit. See someone in need, Something undeserved, driven by compassion, not paybacks

if anyone could talk about mercy, it would be Peter, right? Mercy is such a big deal to him. I believe that’s because Peter the big talker turned into Peter the Jesus-denier; and God showed mercy. A LOT of mercy

Flexes of power are one thing – make us stand in awe, plenty of times in the Bible we could say God is great in power.

But, flexes of mercy – that melts us, that goes deep into our hearts. “They didn’t have to do that.” Mercy changes people, their entire destiny. God is the master of that.

Mercy is His motivation in all that is talked about here. And it still blows Peter away that God is like that.

It also still blows Peter away that JESUS IS RISEN – 1:3 (through the resurrection of Jesus Christ) – everything Peter will talk about is built on and grounded by Jesus rising, Jesus being “not dead anymore”

You have to remember that Peter and Jesus had eaten meals together. Jesus wasn’t a mythical figure or a symbolic legend to Peter. Jesus was a personal friend. The center of his world.

Peter reflects on the first Easter morning, and he now knows that morning set in motion all kinds of things

Something that a few days earlier seemed horrible and heartbreaking (the death of Jesus, Peter’s failure of Jesus when it mattered most)

The very SAD Saturday when despair seemed the greatest. Turns into a day so surprising and life-giving and life-changing

He’s pushing anyone who reads this letter to ask themselves a question: Does someone being “not dead anymore” mean something for YOU? (and your life, and the people that matter the most to you, your future)?

Peter says it can. Actually, Peter and lots of others say it should, it has to mean something for you

But, how exactly? This may be where understandably, some might feel there’s a gap, and I think that’s fair. Curtis – he’s writing to people worlds apart. Culture, technology, knowledge, geography – The audience of this writing would be different in lots of ways (2000 years, Middle Eastern culture, Roman empire). Aren’t there so many differences?

Actually, people are still people. These particular people aren’t just philosophers living the good life. You can see in about 5 minutes of study, that the people who received this letter:

they’re experiencing pain, just like you do [pain that’s been inflicted by others, pain that comes through loss, self-inflicted]

they’re also experiencing pressure: for their faith, life is hard, daily grind (financial, family, meaning/purpose, future)

Maybe the audience isn’t from another planet after all.

Which means this message Peter gives them, is a message to us. Under that is a question for them and a question for us: Does someone being “not dead anymore” MEAN SOMETHING for you?

Peter, with 3 decades of perspective of being an eyewitness of Jesus rising from the dead, what would you tell us?

The risen Jesus locks in your future, which fuels hope.

Because Peter is writing to people who have experienced God’s grace firsthand, he tells them in verse 3 “You’ve been given a new birth” That’s a powerful image Jesus used – something so new, bursting with life.

What a gift! But this new birth has a direction.

3Blessed be the God and Father of our Lord Jesus Christ. Because of his great mercy he has given us new birth into a living hope through the resurrection of Jesus Christ from the dead 4and into an inheritance that is imperishable, undefiled, and unfading, kept in heaven for you.

Born INTO things —> Living hope, secure inheritance

Secure Inheritance (imperishable, undefiled, unfading – untouched by death, unstained by evil, unimpaired by time)

inheritance was about physical land/assets that could and would be acquired in the future. Huge part of life

it’s different – something just as real, but also spiritual. Another dimension of life, beyond bank accounts, property, toys, stuff. What about when you die?

Normally you get an inheritance because someone died. This seems upside down. You get something eternal because someone is alive.

Most people care a lot about what comes after death (karma, reincarnation, purgatory). Never feels quite secure —> such a contrast – those pretty flowers that will die, that house that’s seen it’s better days, that property that would get overgrown. Your inheritance doesn’t operate like that. What God has for you is secure!

You’re also born into a living hope –  It’s unfortunate that hope as we use it today is different from the Bible. Today, it seems to be a 50/50 deal, sure it would be nice, but I don’t want to get my “hopes up.”

Hope in the Bible locks into something secure. Another day, breathes life into you. I can keep going. I can face tomorrow. We will walk through this. There’s something so much better.

The risen Jesus locks in your future, which fuels hope. But the opposite would be dying hopelessness [what you counted on goes down the drain]

At times in our life, we feel like we’re there. Money can be gone, good health can vanish, family doesn’t turn out to be what you’d hoped.

But Peter is talking about hope that doesn’t die, can’t be killed

You have to see this connection: Peter is beating the drum: I was there. When it comes to Jesus, especially once he rose from the dead, you can have absolute confidence

Think about the connection that he is making: When Jesus was arrested, persecuted, sentenced, tortured, crucified, executed, buried, it just seemed like there was no reason and no room for hope, hope had completely died for me.

Then on a dime, it became clear, it was all God’s plan, God’s plan for Jesus wouldn’t be defeated, compromised, undone. After he died, Jesus came to life, he rose. Jesus walked, Jesus spoke, Jesus ate, Jesus restored. Anything tied to Jesus is as locked in as it possibly can be – kept in heaven for you (4). You have a firm reservation

What if I mess this up: God is keeping you [verse 5], and one of the means of keeping you, is that you keep believing.

You’re not a robot. You make choices. Your faith isn’t perfect, but it takes one step and then another, even if at times, it’s like you’re stumbling. You’re stumbling forward. God has you. The risen Jesus locks in your future which fuels hope. You keep believing.

Peter paints such a good picture of the future, but it’s easy to ask, what about now? Is there a path forward for tomorrow, and the next day.

The risen Jesus transforms you now.

For people around Christianity, it’s easy to fall into a couple of ditches: (1) give a head nod to the future, but more like fire insurance, but it doesn’t really change you or (2) see Christianity to just be a moral code that you try to live your life by, but you could go a long time without thinking about Jesus rising. There’s another way to live. Peter lives in a very different way.

Because Jesus is alive (all over the Bible we’re told), there are behavior shifts, mindset adjustments, values reset, transformation underway

That could potentially be the best news you could hear today. You aren’t forever destined to a version of yourself that is stuck, frustrated, self-sabotaging. Jesus is alive.

The pain, the pressure points don’t define who you are. I want you to see the change here, the transformation that the risen Jesus brings.

6You rejoice in this, even though now for a short time, if necessary, you suffer grief in various trials

I am not saying that you get this 100% right all the time, but what if there was such a change that the risen Jesus made in you that instead of complaining, bummed out, bottoming out, only to go even lower because of trials, but because a transformation is underway, you’re rejoicing. There’s a different perspective. It’s not as if things are easier, you just have more confidence that God has you. He will work things out.

Can you imagine the grandma that HATES flying, getting on a plane, dealing with claustrophobia, all because seeing her grandkid is well worth it. There’s a different mindset. I wouldn’t choose to be on this flight. But, I 100% chose to be on this flight.

Life is a little bumpy, but I am secure with Jesus. It makes me smile

6You rejoice in this, even though now for a short time, if necessary, you suffer grief in various trials 7so that the proven character of your faith—more valuable than gold which, though perishable, is refined by fire—may result in praise, glory, and honor at the revelation of Jesus Christ.

The proven character of your faith – the reliance on God, it’s been tested, and come out on the other side. I wonder if some people think belief in Jesus is like this massive leap into the most unbelievable thing, when I really believe it’s more like relying on Him one step at a time.

What do we do sometimes with trials – we panic/run (I had a friend that wrestled with the Sunday scaries)

But what if it went something like this. Jesus is alive, and you really rely on that and so you are being transformed. Getting refined is a painful process. Fiery, things close to us get burned. That doesn’t belong. That isn’t needed. That won’t help you. It’s peeled away. It’s burned off. He’s refining you into who you were meant to be. He’s finishing what he started, and so you’re relying more and more on him.

And your faith is proving to be real. This isn’t a game you’re playing. It’s not just that you’re a Christian because literally almost everyone you know is a Christian. It means something to you. And when everything is said and done, and Jesus is revealed to be King, everything will show, he means something to you. You’re transformed.

There’s even more

1:8 8Though you have not seen him, you love him; though not seeing him now, you believe in him, and you rejoice with inexpressible and glorious joy,

Instead of being unsettled by NOT seeing him, or the physical distance, you’re loving and believing more

For 3 of the 5 years we were dating and engaged, Shawna and I were hundreds of miles apart. That does something for a relationship. It either pushes you apart. Or it just draws you closer and closer to such a place of anticipation, and that’s what it did for us.

Unlike Peter, we’ve never seen the risen Lord Jesus, we don’t see him now, but our relationship can get closer or closer. We find ourselves more and more devoted to him, and again, that transforms us. We have this heightened expectation as He walks with us, empowers us, comforts us. What will it be like when we see Him?

Insecurities you have about your appearance, or your abilities aren’t the main thing anymore. HE is. The pursuit of more money, more attention, more likes, more power begins to fade, because He means everything to you.

You’re transformed in one more area.

9because you are receiving the goal of your faith, the salvation of your souls.

We started with God giving us a new birth. And now another gift brings it all the way home. We have a taste now, of what will be completed later.

Instead of spiraling because the here and now is pretty all-consuming, you’re receiving a taste of the outcome – this is what it feels like to be free, loved, clean, accepted, forgiven, welcomed

This transformation that is possible because of Jesus being alive, some of you have experienced. you’ve gone “all in.” You believe, love, rely. No question. What a jolt of hope that God transforms you now, and preparing you slowly, but surely for everything He has for you for eternity. You’re not perfect, but God is patient and He’s doing something. What a good God.

For others: you might be close enough to know He’s there, but not deeply invested. What a day it could be for you today, if that were to change When you take a step to him. The good news is that God already has taken the first step toward you. More than that, He loved you first. He’s done the heavy lifting. All of it. Today, it’s a matter of turning from anything and everything else that rules your life, and deciding you will rely on Jesus alone for everything: your identity, your future, your hope.

No button you press, no card you sign. A conversation where you find mercy. It may sound something like

“Dear God, I know that I am not worthy to be accepted by you. I don’t deserve your gift of living hope. I am guilty of rebelling against you and ignoring you. I’m sorry, and I need your forgiveness. Thank you for sending your Son to die for me so that I may be forgiven. Thank you that he rose from the dead to give me new life. Please forgive me and change me, so that I may live with Jesus as my ruler. Amen.”

We began our time talking about the perspective you have when you can look at something life-changing decades later.

You read of the person who was on the beaches of Normandy, or in the WTC, they say “the world was never the same for me.”

Peter would say AMEN to that when it comes to the resurrection of Jesus.

So: Is the world the same for you? Does Jesus being “not dead anymore” mean something for YOU?

<><><><><>

4.20.2025    Brainerd  (Sunday AM)