NOT A STRAIGHT LINEDISSECTING A DISASTERGENESIS 37

INTRO – One of the best movies with one of the best opening scenes ever has to be Remember the Titans. Coach Boone, his wife, Coach Yost, his daughter walking in a cemetery with a group of men, a high school football team all grown up. Remember the Titans begins, almost at the end, and then the movie builds the action. The movie tells the story of how everything got to that point.

If you were with us last week, you know we’re looking at the life of Joseph [series slide], and if you try to picture the closing scene of Genesis 37, the scene wouldn’t be so inspirational. Genesis 37 ends as…

A 17 year old is sold into slavery by his older brothers, a victim of kidnapping and trafficking, that result was only slightly better than being murdered which was also in the realm of possibility.

Group of men (brothers) have guilty consciences for decades because they destroyed their brother’s life. No lapse, no accident. It was done with evil intentions.

Dad (Jacob) has been lied to by his own sons, misled, his world is destroyed. He will never be the same. He will mark years by that event.

How does life end up there? How are such bad decisions made? So many of them. How are so many lives wrecked?

We’re in back-to-school season, and what you never hear when you look at a 2nd grade class picture.

Here’s Mikie – he’s going to foolishly empty out his bank account on a whim, betray friendships and cheat at work

Here’s Sally – she’s going to grow up, have an emotional affair, call it quits on her marriage shocking her spouse and kids

Here’s Ernie – he’s going to wrap his car around a telephone pole because of an addiction, or his anger is going to turn abusive

No one in their right mind goes there. If we don’t want it, how does it happen? This is where a STREET VIEW of this chapter could be really helpful. A play-by-play of “any given moment.”

This is a story where we can dissect the individual parts of a disaster, look at how things work together, how things get ruined, who is exploited, what comes next.

If we could just spare our lives from heartache, wouldn’t it be worth it. If we could be satisfied with God to the point that we don’t look elsewhere?

Where should we start if we’re trying to dissect a disaster? What’s on the table before we meet any specific individuals. If we’re going to talk about sin, wicked, evil, the Bible starts with OUR HEART.

By heart, I am not talking about your internal organ, but the control panel of your life. It is you, what you want, how you think, how you see things, what matters to you, what story you tell yourself, what your ambitions are.

Our hearts can be dark (deceitful above all things desperately wicked). Pre-Genesis 37, we get some glimpses into hearts – Oldest brother of Joseph Reuben (committing incest), Simeon and Levi (violent, wiping out a village), Judah engages a prostitute and acts like a judgmental hypocrite (38).

These aren’t just good guys with really good hearts, doing the best they can, but just somewhat misunderstood. That’s a naïve view of human nature. That isn’t them, that isn’t us.

We start with the heart, but look at verses 1-3

Joseph brings a bad scouting report (news slanted to damage 4 of his brothers). How do you think that lands?

You have a Dad that played favorites. Dad that put that favoritism front and center with a gift of a coat. More than just getting the really good Christmas present. Some saw the coat as a signal of royalty.

ENVIRONMENT that’s conducive for poor decision-making

The environment/conditions of living for Joseph/brothers/dad are terrible. We talked about this a little last week. You begin to hear and see more.

It’s not surprising that family dysfunction flows out of this environment. I am not trying to excuse anything, but it surely is helpful in trying to understand some of what is going on here.

If we took the worst moments you’ve had as a human being, I am sure there were environmental factors that were really tough. these things make a difference. They make life harder rather than easier. Over time, these things begin to work on us, and not for the good. No excuses, but let’s live in the real world. Our environment has an effect on us.

Keep reading in verses 4-11

Notice v4. Hate and can’t speak peaceably to Joseph (4)He tells them a dream, hate even more (5).Post-dream after grasping what he’s saying, hate even more (8) for dreams and wordsJealous of him (11) – they’re thinking “we should have some of that”

Did you notice the PATTERNS that get reinforced

The heart which can already be inclined in the wrong direction, with each verse gets more entrenched. The patterns DON’T get addressed.

You can almost feel the darkness grow. There are times where it seems like it gets easier to sin more deeply, easier to move further away from the Lord, and a healthy relationship with Him. It’s scary!

How is your heart? And how are you looking at your environment? It’s fair to acknowledge difficult circumstances. They may be unreasonable. But, what’s going on with you, and where can that lead?

Are patterns beginning to develop that you might even be tempted to excuse or not deal with? Have you talked to anyone about it?

Let’s keep reading verses 12-17

The geography is that Joseph is about 50-60 miles away from home. Surely there is a lack of discretion on Jacob’s part. The timing (we don’t have Life360 to keep tabs) is significant.

And then the moment comes in verse 18 & 19

OPPORTUNITY that presents itself

The brothers probably recognize Joseph by his coat, they remember the dreams, now they are prepared to do something. Joseph’s there. They’re relatively alone.

Do you see how patterns that go unchecked set us up for something like this?

Have you thought through what happens when opportunities present themselves? Where you can act out on what you’ve been thinking? Restrictions seem minimal, transparency is somewhat absent, seems reasonable, pressure begins to mount.

Digital: you swipe, click, send the messagePhysical: you take a next step, you give in, you go along

Who will ever see? What’s so bad about it? It’s hard to resist? Life changes in these moments.

Verse 20

Now, we have the ESCALATION that changes things

These brothers have rallied together. They are all on the same page. Look at the plan

Murder (we can kill him), throw him in a pit (dispose of the evidence), we have a decent story (vicious animal got him).

This is far beyond just hating or being jealous. This is beyond sibling rivalry, yes. Plotting, scheming, violence. They just can’t get past the dreams, can they (sarcastic comment)?

Listen: As things escalate, it seems like they are going to get what they want. That’s the way it works so often. We think that if we get exactly what we want, it will satisfy, until it doesn’t.

Theologians have a term, called total depravity – No one is as evil as they could be all the time. Sin corrupts everything. It’s worse than we thought. It’s always worse than we thought.

The story has a little wrinkle. (21-24).

Seems like a momentary, what are we doing here? Reuben is the oldest, and he should speak up.

RATIONALIZATIONS

Pit – let’s put him in that, then maybe we move on (he has a plan)

So, they do throw him in a pit. Maybe they think to themselves. “At least we didn’t kill anyone.”

The coat comes up (he deserves this), they strip him of his robe.Maybe they think of the dreams, and go “Enough is enough. This needs to stop right here.”

With the dreams, it can be hard to know whether we are to read Joseph as a spoiled brat (seems unwise/immature). But do these guys seem like they’d be doing a lot that would prove trustworthy?

Were there some rationalizations? I think there were. We tend to be fairly good at them.

I’m entitled. Nothing really/technically wrong. It doesn’t hurt anyoneThey had it coming. I’m just tired of everything. If you only knew.That’s how I am wired. People just have to deal with it.

What’s your rationalization of choice? It probably depends.

In a chilling moment in Verse 25 – they sat down to eat a meal. We don’t find out until later in the story that Joseph is pleading and crying for them not to do this. Ummm…could you pass the steak sauce?

CALLOUSES that let you move on

You so deaden or cover over the spiritual nerves with layers and layers of rationalization and letting sin grow.

There is something of an escapism that comes with sin. We feel like it’s not that complicated to take a step out of it all. You gamble, get high, get drunk, scroll, binge, quit trying, and think somehow it’s not really any problem. It doesn’t work that way, and we know better.

Heart, Environment, Pattern, Opportunity, Escalation, Rationalization, Callouses, then Verses 25-28 present another interesting piece of timing

DECISION gets finalized. It happens in a “moment,” but not really

Judah takes the lead (critical in the future). His brothers listen to him.

We don’t have to murder. After all, he is our brother. We don’t have to deal with incriminating evidence. He’s convinced himself and the others that it’s a win/win situation. We don’t have to kill anyone, we can be done with this and we can profit. We can actually make money.

In hindsight, final decisions like this can make us say, “What was I thinking?” Or say things like “That was so rash. I don’t know where that came from. I don’t know how I ended up there.” But, when we see all the factors, it becomes clearer. We can’t really run or hide. This is where it was going.

What we never quite anticipate is the AFTERMATH that you live with.

Think you solve one problem, you create 15 more.

Things have changed for Reuben. (29-30)

Any sadness seems fairly self-centered, “Look at my problems.” He realizes that any thought of a firstborn blessing is gone.

Read 31-33.

Things have changed for the brothers and for Jacob. Notice the language of “Your son” in verse 32.

Their dirty work is done. Maybe for a while they could say to their conscience, “I never killed anybody and technically I never actually lied to dad.” Maybe they think it’s better that Joseph’s gone. More harmony now.

Verse 34-36

“My life is done.” As dad grieves, the concerned sons move in to try to comfort. Dad we’re so sorry this happened!!

Verse 35 we feel depth of pain.

The sibling’s reaction hits you as a little hypocritical, doesn't it?

Things have changed for Joseph. Joseph gets to Egypt.

CONCLUSION

You might be thinking as we have dissected this disaster (slide with progression)…where is God in all of this? It’s a really good question. Actually, nowhere in Genesis 37 do you read the name God or the Lord. Not anywhere in this chapter. It’s as if God goes dark.

This is a story of sin, death, and pain. But actually, God isn’t absent. God works in situations like this and rewrites stories like this with grace. I don’t say this lightly. When it comes to the Lord, He consistently shows grace. It’s a defining quality of who He is.

In all the ugliness, God is actually there, giving grace to victims like Joseph. The final chapter of someone exploited like Joseph’s life is not written, their destiny isn’t sealed, even though everything would indicate that being a slave is the end of his life (life expectancy). It isn’t. YOUR future doesn’t have to be the worst thing imaginable. God can meet you with grace, even if you’ve been hurt deeply. Please keep joining us as we look at Joseph.

I sense the presence of the Lord in another way. In reading the ugliness of what the brothers have done, God gives YOU grace in providing “off-ramps”. The progression/digression you’ve seen is not a case-closed inevitable story. We’re called to fight sin, and the fight is really hard, but we’re not left completely at the mercy of Satan and his schemes. 1 Corinthians 10:13 – God is faithful; he will not allow you to be tempted beyond what you are able, but with the temptation he will also provide the way out so that you may be able to bear it.

Remember the Titans ends where it began: in a cemetery. It’s a place where you have to think about death.

Of course, there is one death that matters in Scripture. The death of Jesus Christ for sinners on the cross.

That one man’s death does mean that even in disasters, God also gives grace to the ones who sin. I spoke of the aftermath.

We all live with decisions, things that escalated, dumb rationalizations that we made. We live with guilt, shame, regret, remorse, isolation. The Lord meets us in those dark places. It’s not cheap grace. It’s what the cross of Jesus is all about: the payment for sin, the defeating of darkness, the forgiveness of all those who’ve crossed the lines they never should have.

The biggest disaster of all is to think you’re okay, that you don’t need Jesus, that He wouldn’t want you. Today, we can confess, we turn, and he meets us with mercy and grace. YOU are more likely to write yourself off than God who loves you deeply. May Grace come alive to you.

<><><><><>

8.17.2025    Brainerd  (Sunday AM)