NOT A STRAIGHT LINEPRESSURE AND TIMEGENESIS 40

INTRO: If there is enough intense pressure (think of elements like water, wind, sun, heat), and that pressure just doesn’t relent for a long period of time, all kinds of things change. Intense pressure over time can make things fade, buckle, break, overflow, even turn catastrophic.

Our lives can feel that way sometimes (diagram).

Intense pressure often causes us to ask WHYExtended time leads us to ask HOW LONG

And we find ourselves with more questions than answers at times. So how do we deal with that?

We’ve been looking at Joseph (series slide) the last few Sundays. Joseph’s life which was anything but a straight line has faced tough scenarios and intense pressure.

Favorite son hated by brothers (whole other story)Slave (who actually seems to be doing well, only to be lied about)Prisoner slave (who has to be deeply hurt; intense pressure)

The closest I’ve read in recent days would be POW stories.

Sometimes I fear that we almost flatten the Bible out when we read (this happened, then this, then this). It becomes 1-dimensional. For someone like Joseph, it’s helpful to think in terms of time – we do some math

Joseph was sold into slavery at age 17. We will find out in the next chapter that when he is finally out of this ordeal, he is 30. 13 years. Much of this chapter happens around 2 years before he’s released. So at this point he’s had to deal with tough stuff for 11 years.

2014. Where were you? How old were the people you love dearly? Did you know them yet? How did you survive without the Apple Watch?

That’s a long period of time, to face wave-upon-wave of tough situations.When we left Joseph in chap 39, he was in prison, as we resume he still is.

1After this, the king of Egypt’s cupbearer and baker offended their master, the king of Egypt. 2Pharaoh was angry with his two officers, the chief cupbearer and the chief baker, 3and put them in custody in the house of the captain of the guards in the prison where Joseph was confined. 4The captain of the guards assigned Joseph to them as their personal attendant, and they were in custody for some time.

For Joseph there are some new circumstances, new people (king of Egypt, baker, butler), but time goes on. None of this is moving fast. I know I am talking to many people waiting for something to change.

5The king of Egypt’s cupbearer and baker, who were confined in the prison, each had a dream. Both had a dream on the same night, and each dream had its own meaning. 6When Joseph came to them in the morning, he saw that they looked distraught. 7So he asked Pharaoh’s officers who were in custody with him in his master’s house, “Why do you look so sad today?”

The progression: (1) He saw they were distraught, (2) so he asked why. One thing you notice in these early chapters chronicling Joseph’s life, is that we don’t have much direct speech. We pay attention when he speaks.

JOSEPH HASN’T LOST SIGHT OF OTHERS

He saw, so he asked. The people around him (cupbearer/baker) are seen, despite his circumstances. Two initial strangers, and Joseph sees them. This is so in line with what we read in…

Philippians 2:4 – we should look not to our own interests, but rather to the interests of others.

Jesus commands to love our neighbor (Story of the good Samaritan)

Countless examples of Jesus seeing people that almost everyone seemed to miss.  [Matt. 9:36 – When he saw the crowds, he felt compassion for them, because they were distressed and dejected, like sheep without a shepherd.]

This is core to who the Lord is, and it’s a core marker of his disciples – we don’t lose sight of others.

Do you see others when you experience intense pressure?

It’s hard. When we’re under pressure for a long time, getting mistreated, it’s so easy to become selfish. I can turn inward. I wonder why people haven’t noticed me and all the stuff I am dealing with.

Something powerful is going on here. It just reminds me: there are people that are going to come into your life. Do you see them? Joseph hasn’t lost sight of others.

Go back to v8 and notice something else. Remember, Joseph saw & asked “Why do you look sad?

8“We had dreams,” they said to him, “but there is no one to interpret them.” Then Joseph said to them, “Don’t interpretations belong to God? Tell me your dreams.”

Even under intense pressure over a long time,

JOSEPH HASN’T LOST SIGHT OF GOD

We come to know who Joseph is by his words. Remember Joseph’s words: how God relates to sin in the last chapter (39) – How can I do this great wickedness and sin against God. There is a very real God, and I can’t sin against him.

And here he is speaking of God again. How God relates to dreams he’s been told about. “Dream interpretations come from God.”

Scholars tell us that Joseph’s understanding of dreams would be unique in ancient Egypt. There was an elaborate way this culture deciphered dreams.

A lot of times we think of dreams as very random. A little out there. In Egypt it would be more in the field of universities and math/science. Interpretation was actually more of a solution: like a solution to a complicated math problem – solve for X and Y

Who can decipher the dream? There was training, techniques. Court of Pharoah would’ve been full of this stuff – Baker/butler not in the court of Pharoah, no access to dream solving.

Joseph could’ve been quiet for a variety of reasons. But here he is saying: There’s a different way this works. God possesses the meaning of these dreams. He can choose who to reveal the solution or meaning to.

Joseph’s default is to think and even talk about how God intersects with life. He could’ve put some distance between he and the Lord. Not that he should’ve done that, but sometimes people do. Had he prayed? Had those prayers been answered (answered in a way he wanted)? What did that mean to him? But here he is speaking about God. It isn’t back-of-mind, and it isn’t hidden.

This reminds me of Daniel. They share things in common. They are in a foreign, pagan land. There’s no access to the revelation of God. And so people turn to dreams and what they signify. And God works.

Daniel 2:27–28 27Daniel answered the king, “No wise man, medium, magician, or diviner is able to make known to the king the mystery he asked about. 28But there is a God in heaven who reveals mysteries.

Essentially, that’s what Joseph is saying. Joseph is communicating that he is in relationship with God. Tell me what your dreams are. God is with me, he has given me favor, and will communicate to me what yours mean. Jospeh hasn’t lost sight of God’s active presence with Him.

There must have been a conscious decision by Joseph not to lose faith, to have a God-sized lens for how he’s viewing things.

It could’ve been a struggle for Joseph and it might be for you. But I love how that for Joseph when something comes up, God comes up!

We keep reading 9-13

9So the chief cupbearer told his dream to Joseph: “In my dream there was a vine in front of me. 10On the vine were three branches. As soon as it budded, its blossoms came out and its clusters ripened into grapes. 11Pharaoh’s cup was in my hand, and I took the grapes, squeezed them into Pharaoh’s cup, and placed the cup in Pharaoh’s hand.” 12“This is its interpretation,” Joseph said to him. “The three branches are three days. 13In just three days Pharaoh will lift up your head and restore you to your position. You will put Pharaoh’s cup in his hand the way you used to when you were his cupbearer.

There isn’t any fuzziness in the interpretation = fortune cookie (some good things might cross your path). But, listen carefully to this next section

40:14–15 14But when all goes well for you, remember that I was with you. Please show kindness to me by mentioning me to Pharaoh, and get me out of this prison. 15For I was kidnapped from the land of the Hebrews, and even here I have done nothing that they should put me in the dungeon.”

Joseph hasn’t lost sight of God or others, but for all the pressure Joseph has experienced over time, what I also recognize is that

JOSEPH HASN’T LOST SIGHT OF REALITY

It’s probably dangerous to over-read Joseph’s psychological state into this. Still we hear what is on his mind. Where is Joseph? Remember me, please do me kindness, mention me, get me out. It isn’t passive resignation to the circumstances. He plays things out in his mind, and asks the baker to do something for him.

He hasn’t lost sight of what really happened. His disturbing past is a part of him. You can’t pretend that bad things never happened. This isn’t where we hear some sort of cheap slogan “just get over it.” Listen to him.

(1) I was stolen and (2) here also, I have done nothing to deserve this

Now, everything that happened doesn’t seemed like it consumed Joseph, but it’s helpful to me to hear him process how he sees it. He’s not a robot.

A: God isn’t asking you to live in a make-believe world. There’s no pretense that injustice or abuse really didn’t happen, or that it really didn’t hurt.

There also are seasons where you appeal, question, challenge, take opportunities as they open.

Over-spiritualizing – Joseph should’ve just prayed. Joseph balances trust as well as clear thinking.

How Joseph could have this sort of perspective undoubtedly takes a lot of time to face reality, a lot of sensitivity, a lot of grace. But, God has a lot of experience in the restoration and rebuilding business, the healing business. Don’t give up. Don’t lose heart!

This particular chapter ends…

40:16–23 16When the chief baker saw that the interpretation was positive, he said to Joseph, “I also had a dream. Three baskets of white bread were on my head. 17In the top basket were all sorts of baked goods for Pharaoh, but the birds were eating them out of the basket on my head.” 18“This is its interpretation,” Joseph replied. “The three baskets are three days. 19In just three days Pharaoh will lift up your head—from off you—and hang you on a tree. Then the birds will eat the flesh from your body.” 20On the third day, which was Pharaoh’s birthday, he gave a feast for all his servants. He elevated the chief cupbearer and the chief baker among his servants. 21Pharaoh restored the chief cupbearer to his position as cupbearer, and he placed the cup in Pharaoh’s hand. 22But Pharaoh hanged the chief baker, just as Joseph had explained to them. 23Yet the chief cupbearer did not remember Joseph; he forgot him.

When I read verse 23, it’s hard for me to hear it and not think this has to be one the SADDEST VERSES in all the Bible. Here’s the challenge for me…

Despite Joseph not really being guilty, he’s sold into slaveryDoing what’s right, he’s put into prisonDespite the dream interpretation, no remembrance of Joseph

This chapter doesn’t end the right way in my mind. I know there’s more to the story, but at this given moment it’s pretty frustrating.

If we were to stop reading, it’s so tempting to write off this chapter as uneventful for Joseph – nothing happening, no forward progress.

You could say, yes, but notice how Joseph is one step closer to Pharaoh. But, two things. Joseph doesn’t know that & Joseph’s situation isn’t going to change for a while (and it NEEDS to change).

We will leave Joseph in prison, and evaluate where we are for a minute. This chapter is a huge help to us. We have a really helpful model to learn from. How we don’t have to lose sight of others, God, reality.

Maybe you’re being to think “I could never be like Joseph.” You might be surprised. God may give you unusual resources, as you walk, as you ask.

You will need resolve, courage, wisdom and help. “That’s my problem! I don’t have that.” You have a very generous Father who loves to give good gifts to his children. Refuge and strength when you need Him. It might surprise you what could happen.

But, God gave us more than an ancient blueprint to try to follow when the pressure comes and won’t quit. He has given us more than just a command to buckle up or to buckle down.

He actually came in the flesh for us and for our salvation. He knows our every weakness. He experienced what it means to be human. Think about this:

Jesus walked with the FATHER so closely. That defines his whole life. He never loses sight of what the Father is doing.

My Father works and I work, and I always do the will of my Father, always what pleases him

Garden – Not my will but yours be done

Father would say, this is my beloved Son, I am so pleased by Him

The pressure came, and it was often relentless. Jesus never lost sight of his Father.

And even in the most intense pressure He deeply thought of OTHERS. And I don’t mean the lovable, but the ones who sin against him.

(Luke) He came to seek and save the lost, (Mark) not to be served, but to serve, give his life as a ransom for many

(John) No one takes my life, but I lay it down, just as a good shepherd does for his sheep, Jesus does this for his friends, and then calls people like you and me his friends.

On the cross, forgive them, they don’t know what they’re doing. The just dies for the unjust that He might bring us to God (Peter)

Jesus never loses sight of a bride that He will present to the Father.

He was in touch with REALITY – furthest thing from a made-up comic book superhero, or a live-action fictional character

I am going to Jerusalem to die, and he acknowledges that it would be a very bitter cup that he would have to drink

Heb. 5:7 – During his earthly life, he offered prayers and appeals with loud cries and tears to the one who was able to save him from death

My God, My God, why have you forsaken me (isn’t symbolic, but real)

Heb 12 2 – endured the cross, despised the shame

Consider Him who endured hostility against himself – Heb 12:3

He walked this road every step of it before you under intense pressure, and if you put your trust in Him, you are united to Him.

This is the deep, deep love of Jesus. You’ve never encountered anything like it. This is the amazing grace of Jesus.

He came for you, lived for you, He died for you, He rose again for you

He infuses you with strength. He goes to bat for you. He produces something new in you. This was God’s plan all along. Jesus executes it perfectly

However hard and difficult your road is. Whatever pain you’ve experienced or even caused. The pressure that is more and more intense, the amount of time which gets longer and longer…our identity is now completely wrapped up in him forever

When can we expect the love of Jesus to fail?  11 years, 13 years, 80 years

It’s only right to expect some pressure, intense pressure, soul-crushing pressure. You are His. He won’t let your soul be lost.

Romans 8 – Nothing will separate you from his love

2 Corinthians 4:16–18 16Therefore we do not give up. Even though our outer person is being destroyed, our inner person is being renewed day by day. 17For our momentary light affliction is producing for us an absolutely incomparable eternal weight of glory. 18So we do not focus on what is seen, but on what is unseen. For what is seen is temporary, but what is unseen is eternal.

<><><><><>

8.31.2025    Brainerd  (Sunday AM)