Progress ReportGOD’S WAYS: DIFFERENT AND BETTERActs 11:19-30

INTRODUCTION

Continuing our series in Acts (title slide) today, we will be looking mainly at Acts 11, but I want to start with a words from a Jewish prophet who lived over 2500 years ago. A message that the prophet Isaiah had received directly from God through the Holy Spirit.

“For my thoughts are not your thoughts, and your ways are not my ways.” This is the Lord’s declaration. “For as heaven is higher than earth, so my ways are higher than your ways, and my thoughts than your thoughts. (Isaiah 55:8–9)

This is deep, but not complex. God’s thoughts – his rationale, his wisdom, his thought processes. God’s ways – his actions, his decisions over time

Are Different – Difference between the thoughts and ways of God, and what typically are our thoughts and our ways.

Are Superior/Better – there is an incalculable qualitative difference

That will help us work through our passage today. Over the past several weeks, we’ve been making stops in the book of Acts. It helps to see things there, and apply them today. How has God worked in his church in the past, and how will he do it now. Acts is where the church of Jesus is established, and grows, and matures, and even spreads. Particularly, we’re going to see that God’s ways and God’s thoughts are so different and so much better, when it comes to the church.

When it comes to the church being all that God would have us be…

WHAT ARE IDEAL CONDITIONS FOR GOD TO WORK?

In our flesh we have some answers.

When you can make a big splash, gain goodwill in the community, a good tactical plan, have a good amount of resources, be in the right location. Or if we can just get some long-term stability, things settled. All those things can be really helpful. But, we might be surprised by God’s thoughts and ways.

We generally don’t think about hostile opposition, massive disruption with little time to get traction, needing to fly under the radar as an ideal situation

When we face hard stuff, generally our initial optimism can really fade. We may almost begin to think: “It is what it is, maybe somehow, something good will come out of it.”

But God’s ways are not our ways, they’re different and they’re better

Look at what Acts 11 teaches us:

11:19 with MAP – Now those who had been scattered as a result of the persecution that started because of Stephen made their way as far as Phoenicia, Cyprus, and Antioch, speaking the word to no one except Jews.

Understand geography, first. Maps tend to help me: Exodus from Jerusalem They go to all these different places, and God uses that.

Get a handle on 11:19 again. What is the ideal situation for God to work, to show his power, his wisdom? What launched this movement? Persecution

What are ideal conditions for God to work? His ways aren’t our ways, and apparently seasons of displacement, disruption, confusion, uncertainty, pain are prime backstories for him to show grace and for His grace to be spread.

I confess, I don’t always get that. And I often pray and wish in the opposite direction for my family for my friends.

Could that mean that there is a backstory being written in here today? The conditions that you assume are so NOT ideal.

Seasons of displacement, disruption, confusion, uncertainty, paininfertility, anxieties, addictions, layoffs, transfers and burnoutfatigued, chronic pain, disconnecteddisillusioned, faith has taken a shotSeasons where we pray, “Lord, I believe, but I just don’t understand.”

You’re not even sure God is working. But, what if he is!

I saw this firsthand a few months back. In the fall a hurricane went through FL, GA, SC, NC. My mom/sisters were in the path. What I saw firsthand in Augusta was amazing.

I would not wish suffering, trials, pain on anyone.

Romans 8:28 – God works ALL things together FOR GOOD2 Corinthians 1 – We receive comfort, and we’re able to comfort others1 Samuel 17 – this battle that looks daunting belongs to the Lord2 Cor 12 – Weakness is a platform for God to show His strength.

What if the Lord’s ideal to work in our church sometimes isn’t one of “favorable” conditions, a season of projected strength, but what if God’s going to do some of his best work in seasons of walking together through pain, confusion, disappointment and concern? Lord, help us!!

God’s ways aren’t our ways. They’re different. They’re better. When it comes to the church being all that God would have us be…

WHO ARE IDEAL PEOPLE THAT GOD USES?

There’s the way we often function, which is different from what we know to be true in Scripture. This is an area where it’s so easy to be influenced by our world, our culture.

Who is the #1 draft pick? Who is the #1 influencer that people follow?

Big personalities, flashy skills/gifts, crack the code, read the culture. Who are the pretty, prestigious?

We know that’s how that works in the world. But even in the church we have forms of that (Christian celebrities, individuals with a ton of followers, big names write books, biographies, studies, etc.)

Acts zeroes in on some people God used in Antioch in powerful ways.

Antioch = 3rd largest city in the Roman Empire (Rome, Alexandria); maybe 500,000 people. A strong Jewish contingent, but most people aren’t Jews.

If Christianity could be present and growing, there would be strategic opportunities, think of the sending capacity.

Who would be an ideal person to start that church? Which one of the apostles, or maybe even a family member of Jesus. You would want to send someone strong.

11:20 w/MAP But there were some of them, men from Cyprus and Cyrene, who came to Antioch and began speaking to the Greeks also, proclaiming the good news about the Lord Jesus.

God directs the course of “some of them.” Home is Cyprus, Cyrene. They had migrated to Jerusalem, and now they get “scattered” to Antioch. The work materializes with them. They are IDEAL!

Did you notice their names? They actually are UNNAMED!!!

20But there were some of them, men from Cyprus and Cyrene, who came to Antioch and began speaking to the Greeks also, proclaiming the good news about the Lord Jesus. 21The Lord’s hand was with them, and a large number who believed turned to the Lord.

They seem to have a heart for more people. Not just Jews, but Gentiles. Unnamed, uncredentialed sparkplugs

A little spark –  Playgrounds/parks; job and business contacts; social settings; neighbors; all of the above

The good news about the Lord Jesus is the bus driver. What is that good news?

Who would NOT be a candidate to hear this message. and God uses them. They seem ideal for his purposes.

A few things I love…I love the phrase: “The Lord’s hand was with them.” You 100% want God’s hand with you, not against you. Phrases like this show up:

Eyes of God – seeing        Ear of God – HearingFace of God – Blessing     Arm of God – Strength

Hand of God is even a little more specific. Able to move in more specific ways. Jesus said “I am with you.” Beautiful picture of His hand in this circumstance

They believed/turned to the Lord – I love the vocabulary [believed, repented, were baptized, received forgiveness, received the Holy Spirit, were added to their number

Just a second to appreciate what is happening: There were people who needed Jesus, and through the work of these “ideal nameless people” they were brought out of darkness into life, from rebellion to submission, from apathy to trust.

This particular movement of God’s hand made Jerusalem take notice. Another ideal person (who is named this time) comes into the mix.

22News about them reached the church in Jerusalem, and they sent out Barnabas to travel as far as Antioch. 23When he arrived and saw the grace of God, he was glad and encouraged all of them to remain true to the Lord with devoted hearts, 24for he was a good man, full of the Holy Spirit and of faith. And large numbers of people were added to the Lord.

I love Barnabas. He’s not stagnant. Ready for whatever’s next with God.

Don’t you appreciate people who have an eye for grace: sees grace, makes him really happy, happy about the spiritual progress of others

I think he would be discerning, but it’s not suspicion. Maybe there is room for others who dot I’s and cross T’s differently. Maybe there is room for growth [full of faith]

Barnabas goes into all-out encourager mode with the goal of faithfulness and devotion.

Always room for more ministry workers (not a closed group). Not just roster slots being filled

25Then he went to Tarsus to search for Saul, 26and when he found him he brought him to Antioch. For a whole year they met with the church and taught large numbers.

Saul could be really valuable in this context – establishing them through meeting and teaching

Awareness that God brings new people in for His mission (Saul from Tarsus) —> God might’ve brought you here to help this work.

Barnabas is almost like a Swiss-army knife – someone who can teach the Bible, be a part of a leadership core, but whose best skill seems to be that He is wind in someone’s sails, he can get others in their sweet spot

Zoom out on who are the ideal people – Unnamed people living on mission, Barnabas (not super flashy, but just won’t quit on people). So here you are

introvert – not a mile wide, really deep

mom/dad – we celebrate the missionaries who are the first to tell others about Jesus – That’s you

missionaries – some crazy stories, not necessarily world changers

youth leaderperson that’s like relational Velcroteachers, medical professionals, law enforcement, coachesconversations that go 10% deeperself-appointed chaplains at work, in the neighborhood

Recruiter at Church – can you help me teach, lead, serve, set-up

God’s ways aren’t our ways. They’re different. They’re better. Back to Antioch – what is the fruit that comes out of a church that has that at its core?  When it comes to the church being all that God would have it be…

WHAT ARE IDEAL FOCUS AREAS OF THE CHURCH?

God is planting this church, but how might it grow? If we were church consultants, what would we tell them? What is our impulse? Our radar is a little more heightened right now.

We might say, “Build and strengthen some things internally.” Look at 26

For a whole year they met with the church and taught large numbers. The disciples were first called Christians at Antioch.

Notice they’re referred to as a church. You see that. There’s meeting, teaching. There’s an identity that forms. A name, a label. What does Antioch become? Known to be a group of Christ-followers. Christians.

They don’t choose this name. It’s given to them. They are identified with Jesus Christ. They’re identified with each other collectively. They are the “ones of Christ.” Antioch becomes a hub.

But thinking about what the church can focus on, embedded in the church at Antioch is this OUTWARD ORIENTATION: Who can we bless, who can we reach?

The outward orientation shows up in some Sensitive Stewardship

27In those days some prophets came down from Jerusalem to Antioch. 28One of them, named Agabus, stood up and predicted by the Spirit that there would be a severe famine throughout the Roman world. This took place during the reign of Claudius. 29Each of the disciples, according to his ability, determined to send relief to the brothers and sisters who lived in Judea. 30They did this, sending it to the elders by means of Barnabas and Saul.

There’s an awareness and a connectivity. There seems to be an immediate response of intentional generosity. What does Antioch become? From the start, they are connected to and committed to caring for brothers/sisters.

The outward orientation shows up as a global heartbeat, especially when you start tracing Acts 13,14,15,16 – Antioch becomes the launching pad for mission trips. When Asia needs to hear about Jesus, Antioch sends the people to cross the boundaries. When Europe needs to hear about Jesus, Antioch sends people to cross the boundaries.

We can and should be grateful for what God did through Antioch. This is preserved for us

“For my thoughts are not your thoughts, and your ways are not my ways.” This is the Lord’s declaration. “For as heaven is higher than earth, so my ways are higher than your ways, and my thoughts than your thoughts. (Isaiah 55:8–9)

Some of the deepest pain that you’ve thought that has made you think God isn’t working.

Age, station of life, gifting/skills, past – written you out of the equation. You just might be the ideal candidate for God to work through to bring himself glory.

Maybe God is calling you out of an inward orientation, when it comes to church. Moving you to an outward orientation

PRAYER

<><><><><>

2.9.2025  Brainerd  (Sunday AM)