ARE YOU IN?INITIATING A CONFRONTATIONJOHN 5:31-47

(TITLE SLIDE) Have you ever had someone confront you on something? When someone says some very hard things to you about you. Things that are convicting. Exposed, guilty, filled with shame, defensive, frustrated, embarrassed, humiliated. You have a choice in that moment. Actually, two questions summarize that choice

Do I trust this person? Knowledge, love, wisdomAm I willing to receive the message they are giving? Will this land or will it be dismissed

If it’s for your ultimate good, it would actually be grace for you to be confronted. So, what do you do?

This section of John takes us to that kind of moment. If your dominant impression of Jesus is what you’ve heard other people say or imagine him to be, you could easily think he never said anything confrontational at all. But in the verses we’re going to look at, he in essence confronts them:

You’ve never listened to what God has to say.You’ve never really seen God show up in a tangible way.God’s Word doesn’t truly have a home in your life.You don’t really love God at allYour life isn’t all about pursuing/treasuring what matters most.You’ve totally missed the work of God. You’re on a path to death

Strong, strong words. This is all just really confronting. And it brings us back to the questions.

Do I (really) trust Jesus? Is he loving? Does he know what he’s talking about? Could this help me, save me in the end?

Am I (really) willing to receive his message? Receive = accept it, put it into practice, make it the foundation of everything of my life.

My prayer this week has been this: Jesus, cause your critique of these people to expose the defects in US, show us where our hearts aren’t trusting you, where WE aren’t receiving your message. Cause us to draw closer to you, not to move further away.

Let’s start with trust. Jesus is pressing: here’s why you can believe I am who I claim to be.  Here’s what authenticates my identity and actions. Here’s testimony you can believe. The testimony you should receive.

Before Jesus says the hard thing, he bolsters our trust in Him. We aren’t going to spend long here. Various witnesses, value, useful as testimony

1 – Jesus himself (5:31) 2 – “Another” (5:32)

3 – John the Baptist (33-35) 4–Father working through Jesus (36)

5 – Father himself (37) 6 – Father giving scriptures (39)

All this testimony points to Jesus being trustworthy, but still something is defective; something dangerous and troubling is happening in them

37The Father who sent me has himself testified about me. You have not heard his voice at any time, and you haven’t seen his form. 38You don’t have his word residing in you, because you don’t believe the one he sent. 39You pore over the Scriptures because you think you have eternal life in them, and yet they testify about me. 40But you are not willing to come to me so that you may have life.

How many ways could this be all off track. We need to pay attention, and dial in. Because Jesus is addressing this out of love for our good. He doesn’t help us if he pretends it’s okay. It isn’t to our benefit if this kind of heart goes unaddressed.

Do you especially notice verse 39, these aren’t Bible-ignorers, these are Bible-students, Bible-scholars? They’ve read the OT. You would think they’ve mastered things, but there’s a deficit. They are not willing to come to Jesus so that they may have life.  Look at verse 45

5:45–47 45Do not think that I will accuse you to the Father. Your accuser is Moses, on whom you have set your hope. 46For if you believed Moses, you would believe me, because he wrote about me. 47But if you don’t believe what he wrote, how will you believe my words?”

Moses is hyperlinked to the OT (especially the first 5 books, the Torah, the foundation). You’re missing the point. It’s a danger zone.

A symptom of a defective heart: It’s possible to find yourself

Seeing scripture mainly as  a tool for your personal development, and miss who it leads you to.

Jesus put such a high premium on Scripture and yet, there’s a way to misread it, through that miss, something becomes defective

Imagine this big tool shed, lots of things you can use for your personal project of making life all that you want it to be.

What am I talking about? A little bit tricky. Please stay with me!

read it as if just saying those magic words gives a blessing [almost the same way some other poet or writer – inspirational]

Similarly, trying to use some words from the Bible to get a zen-like state, to ground you – but again, where’s Jesus.

box you can check to say you did your devotions for the day [be in the word, do my “devo” for the day, have my quiet time]

find some examples to follow, to avoid – miss Jesus

listen to a lot of teaching [a little background noise] – miss Jesus

Bible topics become hobbies, controversies you become well versed on (where everyone disagrees)

Master the Bible background, Bible history but very little Jesus

We can take the very words of God, run in the wrong direction. We aren’t following where it leads, aren’t willing to allow the Scriptures to expose how deeply in need of a Savior we are, tough the condition we’re in

It’s not just a tool at our disposal.

Scripture keeps pointing to the Guide outside you – knows the safe path (narrow way), the right destination, and keeps you on it, survival depends on it.  You will miss the words of life, the one the Father sent to bring eternal life

Lifeline outside you – spiritual IV pumping into you, saving your life

It’s become a tool, in the toolshed of your life

How is all that working?  Is my Bible intake regularly bringing me to Jesus?  (not just accumulating wisdom, learning good counsel, appreciating stories) – assumes I am taking in God’s Word

Restaurant you go to, and you end up smelling like it. It’s in your clothes, on your skin, in your hair. I wonder if as we have the Bible take us to Jesus, do we end up having the aroma of Jesus all around us.

God’s word – Taking me to see my need for JesusTaking in the Bible – Opening my eyes to see what I have in Jesus

If my relationship with God is fractured, I need Jesus to healIf my heart is twisted, I need Jesus to set things in orderIf I am drowning, I need Jesus to be my rescuerIf I am dead, I need to be brought to life.

Ongoing work of Jesus in transforming my heart (beyond just getting me on the right track), reminding me of the covenant promises of Jesus, stirring up my hope in Jesus

Bible study doesn't save you. Bible knowledge doesn’t save you. Jesus saves you. That’s where Scriptures point.

There’s something else defective

43I have come in my Father’s name, and yet you don’t accept me. If someone else comes in his own name, you will accept him.

Lots of voices out there, and the people are

Accepting authority, just not Jesus’ authority

You are willing to receive, follow accept someone coming on the scene with authority. Just not Jesus, who’s been commissioned by the Father. Remember “You are not willing to come to me.”

How does this work? Humans are wired to follow. As much as we’d like to think of ourselves as independent thinkers.

We aren’t nearly as independent as we’d like to think we are. We pattern our lives after others. We have models of doing life that we’re impressed with, and we imitate them. Loyalty that can grow, our attention can be captivated

We know what this looks like in school – an upperclassmen, or a new person comes with a strong personality, dress like them, talk like them, priorities change, want what they want

College or early career – compelling professor/teacher, see a mentor, begin to make changes, adapt, your life becomes more and more influenced by them.

It’s good to be in learning mode, versus know-it-all, never-change-my-mind mode

Read widely, watch videos, enroll yourself, subscribe, attend sessions, binge, maybe even leads you into a deeper community, investing hours of week, transforms your thinking, the way you do life.

A lot of voices crying out for attention, there’ve always been. Some are just foolish (Proverbs), some are deceptive. Some can be helpful, some don’t see far enough down the road.

What’s the danger?  There could be a scenario where it’s mainly curiosity, but listening to some voices can become an obsession You just never take the time to evaluate. Is this drawing me more to Jesus? Is this authority competing in space that Jesus has marked out? When I “subscribe,” or “enroll” or binge, or watch, or can’t miss, or pass along:

Celebrities, gurus, experts, teachers compete in the realm of beliefs, motivations, decision-making grids, assessment of who you are. Could we be more motivated to listen to these rather than Jesus?

the way I see right/wrong begins to be informed by all these authorities and look less and less like Jesus

the excuses and the passes I give myself, justifications I make

Self-centered – great commands (love God, neighbor); living in a world where your authority never pushes in that direction, but pushes you into loving yourself more and more.

The voices, the videos, the books, the articles, the talking points, are they taking me toward Jesus? Or am I fostering things that take my heart away from the Lord, where his words don’t seem to have anywhere close to the same draw to us.

Can we answer a diagnostic question: Can I point to places in my life where Jesus is exercising real authority? I am doing this because he says to do it. I am not doing this because he says not to do it.

We’re reading about Jesus. There is one who rules the world, and knows what is best. He says how to live. He sets up boundaries, and says life is found there. Why would we want any other higher authority?

I can expect voices that challenge the authority of Jesus in my life. Strong text – There isn’t room for Jesus plus ________.  Changes have to be made.

The good news for us is that Jesus knows how to take defective hearts and conflicting desires and change us from the inside out.

Jesus asks the listeners that day another question

44How can you believe, since you accept glory from one another but don’t seek the glory that comes from the only God?

Another indicator of a defective heart is when we find ourselves

Seeking glory, just not the glory that comes from God

What others think of us, their assessments gain a lot of traction in our head. Here’s what happens…

As humans, we want to be liked, we crave respect, honor, power, control, praise, approval, affirmation that someone else can give us [that’s part of being human, but it can get really twisted. There’s a dark side]

What happens when you get the glory you seek? Very satisfied, better mood, strong, confident, hopeful. So much is understandable, but the issue is that this can mutate and morph into so many things.

Dangerous because we can begin to see people as a means to an end. Social media can magnify this.

What happens when you don’t get the assessment from others that we seek so desperately?

It’s one thing to be a little sad, but what if we’re devastated, angry, discontent, life isn’t worth living. No one believes in me. No one ever respected me. You never affirm me. It gets bitter

Jesus reveals the big problem.

44How can you believe, since you accept glory from one another but don’t seek the glory that comes from the only God?

This will get in the way – How can you believe? As long as you draw so much glory from other people, the priority of God’s glory will just fall.

Diagnostic Question: Can I point to places where the clear treasure of my life is Jesus? This is second, this is third, I could lose that, this. In the end what I want most is for God to be glorified by me: my life, my death, my gain, my losing, my stress, my pressure, my joy, my hurt, my arrival, my departure.

1 Corinthians 10:31 – whether I eat or drink or whatever I do, I want God to be glorified

CONCLUSION

At the very beginning, I asked you if you have ever been confronted by someone about something. As awkward as it may be, I find it’s easier to listen to other people being confronted. For a while, as I read this week that is what was going on. But then, it seemed like Jesus was addressing me in particular.

He's addressing me because he wants me to trust, he wants me to receive the message, he wants me to rely on him, seek his glory (which would be for my good)

And I came back to these questions.

Do I (really) trust Jesus? Is he loving? Does he know what he’s talking about? Could this help me, save me in the end?

If I don’t trust, I push back, or choose to ignore/dismiss.

But if I do trust, I am coming to

Jesus the only king worthy of complete submission.

Jesus the One whose assessment of us means everything

Jesus, our only hope for life and salvation.

Am I (really) willing to receive his message? Receive = accept it, put it into practice, make it the foundation of everything of my life.

If I trust, the words of Jesus guide me into a genuine relationship with God through Jesus.

If I trust, the words of Jesus will protect the relationship we have.

<><><><><>

5.11.2025    Brainerd  (Sunday AM)