Progress ReportWHAT DEFINES USActs 2:41-47

Reading of Acts 2:41-47, then Series Slide. We are noticing week-by-week what progress looks like in the church, according to Acts.

To help personalize this a little last week, we imagined Joe/Liz last week. We imagined them living in Jerusalem, captured by a message. They respond to some realities that are true.

Jesus is Messiah - promised deliverer from God for His people, and really the nations, worthy of hope, he changed everything

Jesus is Lord – he is a very personal ruler who calls all shots for our good, he determines what’s right, he directs what’s going to happen.

3000 people like Joe/Liz respond with faith, repentance, allegiance.

identification with Him. (full reliance, life completely immersed)forgiveness of sinsreceiving the Holy Spirit into their lives.In short, the language of Acts says this is what it means to be saved.

This is the story of Joe/Liz. If we tracked with them over the next several weeks and months, we would notice things beginning to change – A list of activities that start to define them.

devotion to apostle’s teaching (what the apostles said/taught, since they had spent years with Jesus and an intense 40 days afterward)devotion to fellowship/partnership (common life together)devotion to bread-breakingdevotion to prayer (prayed to God together)taking care of needy among themdevotion to meeting together in the temple [daily]devotion to meeting together house-to-house with joyful, worshipful bread breaking [daily]

I am certain that neighbors would’ve noticed, coworkers, people who have been part of their lives for a very long time

You end up with a group of people who on the one hand have a very close partnership while still seeking, praying, hoping, looking to add more

That’s very appealing – to us, especially with a loneliness epidemic. To be a part of some close-knit group, that’s not a clique, not exclusive

If you spend much time in this passage, and you think about church, about life together, it’s pretty easy to make each of these areas as a measuring stick, formula, roadmap for church. I think it could be useful in those areas.

But, I wonder if approaching it that way without looking at what supports it, is like building a home, and really paying attention to closet size and fixtures, but taking for granted the foundation.

Our starting point isn’t the activities, but what drove the activities. What caused them to happen? What made such a difference to so many people that this naturally followed? Because I believe that maybe those same dynamics are actually driving us, producing some things in us that’s worth calling attention to.

To understand what’s driving things, I am convinced you have to see a word. At the core of what’s in the driver’s seat here is found 3x in Acts 2. We are people who have now been eternally defined by the rescue or the salvation God initiated for us in Jesus Christ.

2:21 – Whoever – Call on the Lord will be saved2:40 – Message receivers Be saved from the corrupt generation2:47 – The ones that are added are saved

We can use a whole vocabulary of biblical words for what God does for us through the work of Jesus, atoned for, redeemed, family, adopted, changed, transformed, reconciled, at peace, insider. But Acts comes back to being SAVED, rescued, removed from danger, secure.

People like Joe/Liz who have been saved grasp something.

They would’ve seen the fireworks of Pentecost, they would’ve heard some things about the cross, resurrection, and the ascension, but God is continuing to work in powerful ways.

43Everyone was filled with awe, and many wonders and signs were being performed through the apostles.

There were unexplainable things happening (signs and wonders). I want to try to explain a pattern I see, without explaining something away. I never want to be in the camp of saying God can’t do something.

In the Bible, there seem to be specific moments/seasons like Moses and Joshua, Elijah and Elisha, Jesusa and Apostles. These are seasons when miracles, signs/wonders spike. I believe God uses these seasons as a major signal, often his covenant relationship enters a new stage

Covenant established – Moses and JoshuaCovenant broken – Elijah and Elisha (judgment follows)New Covenant established – Jesus and Apostles (here)End of time (new covenant fulfilled)

These seasons and spectacles produce awe/fear, questions. Those seasons and times aren’t necessarily permanent, a lot of God’s Word builds on those things, and then proceeds as if that won’t be the norm.

With that in mind some fireworks happen, but you keep reading. 46-47 don’t describe fireworks, but it doesn’t mean that God is absent. They recognize that He is still doing something.

They ate their food with joyful and sincere hearts, praising God and enjoying the favor of all the people.

What’s going on? What is driving? Salvation causes them, people, us to

GRASP THAT GOD HAS DONE AND IS DOING SOMETHING

That pushes them to lean into apostle’s teaching, devote themselves to prayer, to assess their possessions in a different way, to live differently than they had before.

You might have had God do some fireworks in your life, but I want you also to think about all the unexplainable, miraculous, God-directed ways your life has been shaped even without fireworks

everyone complains, you don’teveryone cheats (you’re moral, but that doesn’t explain it)everyone runs others down (spouses, coworkers)everyone lives on more than they make, you give awayfollowing missional callingsfaith of a little child (beyond gullibility or an imaginary friend)Suffers and endures wellStay married, even though 100 things say this would never workseeing kids as a blessing, rather than an impositionwork through things (anxiety, addiction, dysfunctional families)community that’s real, kind – That’s almost too good to be true

Come in these doors, not looking for a spectacle that rivals anything they’ve seen on YouTube, but confronted with a “I don’t know what drives something like this.”

This is God up to things.

If he hasn’t communicated or done anything significant, or doesn’t really plan to, then it’s business as usual. There’s no reason why we would look any different.

Cater to every individualistic impulse – it’s all about you anyway

So busy like everyone else, that there’s no space to assess something bigger

Buy anything and everything that could make you happy or just as happy as everyone is when they post things.

Play it safe, and risk very little, put yourself out there very little, avoid taking the big step of reliance on God.

If God is not up to anything right now, then why bother.

But Brainerd, that is not us. We’re not just convinced God’s best days are in the rear-view mirror, or that He only has a plan for us when we’ve been in heaven 10,000 years. We see the world, we see each other, as the canvas where God is presently doing some mighty work. And we lean in.

I don’t think Acts 2 is giving us a check list, asking us to assess how we’re measuring up. And I don’t think we’re just being given a recipe to follow to do church right. I think we’re looking at people who confess Jesus as their Lord and Messiah being changed, and that change has convinced them that God is up to something. We are as well.

These new sets of activities. Let’s go back to our list of things. Again, we’re asking a question. What is driving this? And we realize again, that their salvation causes them/people/us to

RECOGNIZE THAT JESUS HAS BONDED PEOPLE TOGETHER

There becomes this permanent, deep conviction that our response to Him means we have a life together.

If he had died just to save us individually with no thought to bringing us together in a big way (at least until heaven), then I can just wake up, have my devotions, have my prayer times, listen to my worship music, do my Bible study, watch my videos, read my Christian books, give to some causes I think are valuable and that would be enough.

And as far as church, gatherings like this, then perpetually casual relationships might be okay. We could drift in and out of them.

But if he died to save us as individuals yes, but even more than that as his holy people, the individuals who collectively become his body working together, his temple displaying his glory, his bride in covenant relationship with him, then that changes things.

As you read Acts 2, it’s as if the human author Luke and the divine author the Holy Spirit don’t want you to miss something.

42 – They devoted themselves – there’s functioning as a group42 – There is fellowship/partnership44 – All the believers were together44 – Held things in common (marked off as the Lord’s)46 – Devoted to meeting together (temple / house-to-house)

God has hardwired humans in such a way where when we share a common experience, it really does something to us. More often than not, it BRINGS you together, BUILDS you together (you become something you weren’t before), BONDS you together

Something so defining (tragedy, trauma, achievement)

It’s such a part of your identity (family, flag, nationality, backstory)

Something means a lot to you (loyalty to it) – institutions and organization (armed forces, sorority/fraternity, club, school)

You enjoy something so much (music concert, sporting event, some other entertainment)

Brings you together, builds you together (you become something you weren’t before), bonds you together. Do you recognize that Jesus has bonded us together.

There will be no more defining event for us than the moment we are saved. The moment we go from death to life, the domain of darkness to the Kingdom of Jesus. Lost to found, broken to healed, reconciled, restored, forgiven, brought into the family. That is a bonding agent. It seals us together (yes with Jesus but also with each other).

Our identity, something that creates loyalty, something we enjoy so much. This is what it means to the church of King Jesus.

This means there is a permanent bond with all Christians everywhere.

So many of you have traveled and met other Christians all over the world, and you realize what you share in common is a permanent bond. A man who has been brought out of the darkness of Islam or any other religious system, and has bowed the knee to Jesus, even though socio-economically, ethnically, looks so different, we actually find we are bonded together. Destined for eternity.

All that is very true. But that isn’t meant to provide us distance or a cover for actually living in close relationships with people who are near us.

You really can’t fully live out the teachings of Paul, James, writer of Hebrew, Jude, Peter, John or JESUS without living closely with a group of believers close by

That’s tough, and that’s a strong statement. But, notice Jesus calls Peter, but he is bonded to a group, Matthew is bonded to a group, 3000 disciples are now bonded to a group, Curtis is bonded to a group.

Reading Acts 2 has helped me realistically understand and appreciate some dynamics, let’s face it with 3000 people there are some true things.

You aren’t going to know every single person, but that’s not functioning as an excuse to keep a distance from most. It’s why we eat in each other’s homes. It’s why some of you today, will take the initiative and say, “hey we’re headed out to ____ grab some lunch, would you like to come.”

Another dynamic is that some of the 3000 would annoy you. The people that Jesus bonds you with won’t just be comprised of your best friends that you totally click with. That didn’t happen there. You can read about it, in letter after letter of Paul. But we become a community that’s different…

Sacrificial forgiveness – someone let something you did goBearing the cost – you bear with someonegive for the better of othersstrong don’t exploit the weak – the kingdom is backwardsenduring love – Jesus won’t quit on me

As I thought of the idea of being saved, again and again an image that I had read not too long ago kept coming mind. This pastor was picturing the church as a lifeboat, the captain is Jesus, coordinating and directing a rescue operation, rescuing the perishing and lost, much like his mission on earth when he came to seek and to save the lost. He includes us as his crew. And as we read today, we realized that on this boat the whole crew have had the same defining experience, we all have been rescued by the Lord. We are bonded together.

A bunch of average peopleThere’s the guy who was the hopeless addict (previously hopeless).5 yr old who never has known a time where Jesus wasn’t meaningfulreally important person (she was a CEO)College or a young adult (sense something was missing)so-called strong bonded with the weakmentally tough and those who will wrestle with mental illnessdivorce, had a friend who was patientclass clown and the introvertreal sense they were drowningothers who it wasn’t that acute (but they still were drowning)

Here we all are.

I’ve been in church all of my life. I’ve seen so many churches bonded together in so many different ways.

CONCLUSION

Here we all are, and our captain is still on His rescue mission. We’re still in deeper waters.

He’s mandated that we do life together. He’s given us empowerment to do things we otherwise wouldn’t or couldn’t do. There’s all kind of deference and patience and self-control required. We have to stay focused. With his help, we’re figuring this thing out.

We are at our best when we all grasp that God has done and is doing something, God has communicated and is communicating something. And we are at our best when we recognize and celebrate the fact that God has permanently bonded us together.

I am very confident that’s why the Lord gave us something tangible, something that speaks to our senses to communicate eternal realities and relationships

<><><><><>

1.26.2025    Brainerd  (Sunday AM)