BOOKMARKLOOKING AT THE HARVESTMATTHEW 9

INTRO: When my kids were little, one of the many sweet things they did is make me bookmarks. They’re all so creative, and so if you look at many of my books, you can see them. You know the function of a bookmark:

(1)holds your place, so you can pick up where you left off

(2)takes you back to a place that really stood out, that you want to be able to find immediately

I’ve found it helpful to bookmark some passages. Let’s not lose our place, let’s mark this, so we know how to find it; let it “refresh” on our heart

READ – Matthew 9:35-38

CONTEXT – Jesus continued going around to all the towns and villages, teaching in their synagogues, preaching the good news of the kingdom, and healing every disease and every sickness.

Jesus is on the move with a good news message and pain-eliminating capability. Not sequestered off, but directly involved. He would’ve had so many personal encounters. He doesn’t need an AI summary of problems in the culture. He has real life names/faces/stories [Matt 9]

A few guys who have a paralyzed friendMatthew the tax collector who risks everything to follow himIndividuals who have enough of a past to deserve the label “sinner” from the ones who prided themselves on being betterFair questions by confused seekers, A dad whose daughter had died,A lady who had a hopeless medical conditionTwo blind men – first thing they saw was Jesus

That’s just chapter 9. Jesus knows the medical toll, emotional toll, physical toll, spiritual toll that life has taken on people.

So, WHO DOES JESUS SEE (glasses), and how did he see them

36When he saw the crowds…they were distressed and dejected, like sheep without a shepherd.

You start with a summary description – distressed/dejected (or helpless and harassed, weary and worn out); crowds of people.

personal decisions get you to the point of being distressed/dejectedyou start to age, things compile, things hurt/sting, you can’t get over itprayers don’t seem to get answered, people take advantage of youyou aren’t always at your best, you lose something you love.

Distressed and dejected: Were you created for that? You weren’t! No one knows better than Jesus.

We also need to recognize that as much as the world has changed, much of what Jesus saw really hasn’t in many cases. You cannot buy your way, post your way, perform your way out of being distressed and dejected. Relationships can make things a lot better. A lot of the times, but not always. Medicine can help when things get foggy, but sometimes it seems like the fog won’t lift.  Jesus sees you there.

Then there’s a SPIRITUAL CONDITION: sheep without a shepherd. Jesus knows they could be so much better cared for. Jesus always speaks to the relational dimension

Their deepest need isn’t to turn over a new leaf, manage stress a little more wisely, cope with their problems better, become the new you you’ve always wanted to be.

What your need truly is = entrusting your life to the Lord, the good shepherd, so that they can say “the LORD is my shepherd.” Sounds amazing to have a shepherd, it is, but then it may dawn on you…

he makes me do things (that I might not choose to do)he leads me in the paths HE knows I need to gohe provides things for me (that I don’t have, in myself I have a deficit)

If you don’t have that, then a key component of how you’re meant to live is missing (so we cope, find work arounds, insufficient hacks). That’s who Jesus sees.

Jesus will talk about the Shepherd giving his life for sheep. Victorious risen savior shepherd who guards his sheep and gets them home. All my life you have been faithful. Your goodness is running after me

Jesus sees people, but notice how Jesus is moved by what he sees. Notice his heart, and what he feels. When he sees the crowds, he is moved with compassion.

Every bit of their circumstance fuels compassion for Jesus. These particular crowds move Jesus, but it isn’t a one-time feeling

people are hungry – moved with compassion, he provides foodpeople are grieving – moved with compassion, he speaks comfortpeople are ignorant – moved with compassion, he teaches truth

We need the corrective. Jesus is moved by

Compassion not obligation, someone has to step up here.

Compassion not disgust with them not taking some responsibility

He’s moved with compassion, and doesn’t see them as impersonal “projects”. Even when He is “working on us,” it’s not hands-off, it’s filled with love. He is 1000% invested. He feels compassion.

The perspective Jesus has speaks volumes. And he brings his disciples into this. He brings US into this. Seeing what he sees, feeling what he feels:

Then he said to his disciples, “The harvest is abundant…

NOT: status quo – people will be people, I don’t see where it’s my responsibility to   XYZ.

NOT: this situation is such a mess, we probably need to let them figure out a few things before we get involved.

The disciples are brought into Jesus’ HARVEST perspective – he calls the distressed and dejected, sheep-without-a-shepherd crowd a harvest

A harvest is a really good thing. When the harvest rolls around, you’ve invested a lot. Everything you’ve been waiting on. A white harvest in John 4 when he saw a Samaritan town in this condition.

The harvest is ready to be brought in.

These aren’t people to be despised. These people are like crops in the field that are ready to be harvested. People are there in prime position to be persuaded to entrust their lives to God (the good shepherd)

Step back and appreciate the picture Jesus has given (glasses + heart + harvest). And make it personal by asking some hard questions:

Is the heart of Jesus affecting you?

It should for 2 reasons

(1)we’ve been seen and loved like that.

(2)We follow Jesus. He’s our guide, standard.

So, is it starting to show? The way he sees people. The way he feels about people. Is your sensitivity growing? Does that play a role in family dynamics, work dynamics. Does that affect how you come to church? How well you listen when others speak? Is that characteristic of our church.

WHAT IS NEXT? What’s needed for harvest are workers, and it doesn’t sound like highly technical expert skills are required

People who have a heart to lead people to experience care that Jesus has for them. Do you know anyone who might be able to do that?

Here’s another baseline characteristic: people in the fields, with love, care, friendship, intentional relationships

He gives us his perspective on supply/demand: there is an ABUNDANCE.

Yes, some may choose to sit in a distressed and dejected state; some may refuse to receive a shepherd. But actually there is an abundance of people who are in just the right spot to be persuaded to trust in God. The demand is there.

The LACK – we have too few workers in the field (on the supply side)

We need more workers. Am I wrong to assume we would need all kinds of workers in all kinds of places, all kinds of skillsets, all kinds of strengths, all kinds of connections?

We can appreciate what Jesus is doing: such a sense of urgency building, such a sense of opportunity. We can sense a call to action coming (fill out the card, make the pledge, submit the form)

The first move Jesus calls us to comes as a surprise, we’re told to look up and pray to the one who is in charge [CROWN]…

“The harvest is abundant, but the workers are few. 38Therefore, pray to the Lord of the harvest to send out workers into his harvest.”

Jesus commanded prayer. If we just have a worldly, business, efficiency mindset, this might unfortunately strike us as wasting the moment!

Jesus is doing something. He’s training our assessment – they should view harvest as a task too big for them by themselves; time to call in heavier equipment. Do we really see what’s going on? Do we have the right estimation of what we can bring?

When we moved someone, drove up to the house (way bigger), went in (way more stuff), looked around (nothing is prepared) —> we weren’t prepared at all. we had no clue as to what we were walking into. We weren’t the LORD OF THE MOVE. The only thing we could do: start somewhere and get after it

Jesus is so helpful. It’s as if He’s saying, “Let’s save you the stress. You’re going to the need the Lord of the Harvest invested here.” Did you see that It’s his harvest. We can assume he has the best plan for bringing it in.

You’ve seen the overconfident person who walks in for the first time, and 2 seconds later says, “here’s what you’re doing all wrong.” You don’t want to be that tone deaf when it comes to the Lord’s harvest.

Jesus sees what we miss, so we pray and ask for helpJesus cares when we’re calloused or fed up, so we prayJesus works a plan at levels and a timeframe we can’t comprehend, so we pray.

Don’t get this wrong…The answer isn’t: stay away from any challenges, dial down your care-meter, emotionally check out. The answer is talk to Jesus about the situation. In communication with the Lord

Jesus, help me move toward the harvest, not awayhelp me see the distressed and dejected people you seehelp me feel the compassion that drives you toward peoplebring these sheep into relationship with the good shepherdsend good-news announcers to lead them home

When we approach the Lord of the harvest, we are cultivating a relationship with Jesus. Matthew has been beating this drum, especially in chapter 6,7.

Ask, seek, knock, your kingdom come, your will be done

are these just mantras we recite? No, these are real-time needs because we see the harvest

PIPER – “Prayer is a wartime walkie-talkie [combat situations]. It is not a domestic intercom to ring the butler to bring another pillow up to the den.”

In prayer, we are commanded to specifically ask for workers to be sent out to harvest work, commissioned by the Lord. WORKERS PICTURE

38Therefore, pray to the Lord of the harvest to send out workers into his harvest.”

Notice the request isn’t “go find”, but “send out.”  It’s not that we should pray that somehow, the Lord/King, can go out somewhere and maybe eventually find and recruit someone who might be able to provide something of value.

Send out implies they’re already here. Take who is here, and move them out into action

Put the entire picture together, and you find disciples who would be MOTIVATED by the compassion of Jesus, seeing people as he sees them, and RECOGNIZING inadequacies to turn this all around, and so they pray.

We don’t just need to hear the words and observe, we need to come before the Lord, not hardening our hearts, but listening with an intent to respond. PRAY BIG PRAYERS – will I ask God to do harvest work; Lord, bring the good news, bring your love, bring your grace to every situation.

As a follower of Jesus, are you beginning to pray like Jesus told you to pray? Are you seeing what he sees, feeling what he feels?

CONCLUSION

Often, something seems to click. The heart of Jesus rubs off on you as you pray. Could we do something, could we bring something, could we be involved, could we be one of the workers the Lord sends out into his harvest?

You can’t pray, Lord Send, too many times without eventually going, Here am I, send me.

Sometimes that involves full-time paid work, cross-cultural missions, but what it always means is investing where God has you now.

These disciples had already made conscious choices to follow Jesus. There is a second move Jesus makes with disciples and the harvest.

Matthew 10:1–4 1Summoning his twelve disciples, he gave them authority over unclean spirits, to drive them out and to heal every disease and sickness. 2These are the names of the twelve apostles: First, Simon, who is called Peter, and Andrew his brother; James the son of Zebedee, and John his brother; 3Philip and Bartholomew; Thomas and Matthew the tax collector; James the son of Alphaeus, and Thaddaeus; 4Simon the Zealot, and Judas Iscariot, who also betrayed him.

They pray, and now available people become commissioned people. That is this picture isn’t it [diagram].

Their lives will never be the same. They will be a part of the greatest work ever to be done, announcing the kingdom of God, a part of sharing Jesus to the world.

There is a difference pre-crucifixion/resurrection [healing/casting out]

But, as Jesus prepares to ascend, spreading the good news of the kingdom takes center stage.

Matthew 28 – with all authority [go make disciples]John 20 – breathes, have the Spirit, as the Father sent me, I send youLuke 24 – good news, repentance and faith can be transportedActs 1 – witnessesActs 13 – as they’re praying, the Holy Spirit sends S/B out

PRAYER – Lord Jesus, Teach us to see people  as you see people. Transform us to have compassion as you have compassion. Send workers out.  Send US out to your harvest. Amen

<><><><><>

10.26.2025  Brainerd  (Sunday AM)