What’s the Point?W H A T   T I M E   I S   I TEcclesiastes 3

Introduction (SERIES SLIDE)

I had a neighbor once named Charlie. Charlie knew what time it was. Not really clock time, but maybe more like “season” time. What season is it?

When do you plant stuff?When do you do routine maintenance, sharpen blade, run the snow blower or lawnmower out of gas, change the oilWhen do you fertilize (text reminders – bag of this, in the next week)

Charlie understood seasons.

We cannot talk about our lives, ourselves, what we desire or fear, or what surrounds us, without reference to time. Fernando Savatar

I may know you well, I may not know you at all, but I am guessing you talk about time all the time

Where did the time go       there aren’t enough hours in the dayI wasted all that time, all those years;          When will my time comeI just need a little more time, Do you remember that time we…I don’t want this time to end. I wish time could stand still

We’re walking through some teaching in Ecclesiastes, and I am not sure there’s a place in the Bible that talks about time more or better (3:1-8)

28 different “occasions,” seasons, or times. We’re being told to

LEARN HOW TO LOOK AT THE SEASONS

I said last week that Ecclesiastes helps us NAME things, to think through “what category does this fall under?”

Worth remembering – You aren’t reading moral prescriptions. (i.e. “Schedule time each day to hate something or hate someone”).

You are reading how the world works. Here’s what life is like: some times or seasons catch you off guard, and some you feel intensely. Some seasons are really good, some are really tough, some just are.

Most seasons are connected to people and relationships: birth/death, dance, embrace, don’t touch, laugh/cry. Part of being human is living in relationships with people.

Seasons are often interconnected, overlapping, and not ever really separated. Our times/seasons are pretty mixed.

a baby just born, a loved one passes awaysomeone gets a promotion, someone loses their jobsomething is coming together, something is falling apartYou’re planting new roots, you’re dealing with leaving old ones

You can’t mark a calendar by all of the seasons.

Seasons are sometimes chosen and often given

choice – time to clean out the garage/closetnot a choice – you clean out your office, loved one’s attic

choice – remodel time – demo daynot a choice – your body needs chemo, some experimental treatment – your immune system will be severely compromised

We feel all these seasons, they’re very real. What you don’t read about is a time to disconnect from everyone and everything and drift off into complete nothingness. Life is hard and really complex, but you have to hang in there.

Question – What time is it for you? What are the seasons you’re in?

How are you receiving the expected and wanted ones? Are they gifts to you? I get it, you want to bottle some seasons up, and live there, but could that provoke gratitude?[When I listen to DRIVE]

Are we learning to enjoy things not because you can recreate it, but because God gave it to you. Because you’re you because of it.

How’re you dealing with/adjusting to the unexpected/unwanted seasons?

Does it make you sigh? Does it help you to look to Jesus and all the “times” he experienced? It could help you to read the gospels [building up, letting go, his birth, his death, joy, grief, acceptance, rejection. Jesus lived in seasons.]

Does it help you to know that if you’re a Christian, you have the Holy Spirit, God in you, walking through each season

T: If Ecclesiastes helps us name what life under the sun looks like, I believe that it also makes us recognize we need some things

9-10 are a little like a coldwater brigade. All the beautiful descriptions

9What does the worker gain from his struggles? 10I have seen the task that God has given the children of Adam to keep them occupied.

The profit question – all the seasons, what do you have to show for it? Can you hang on to it. You really can’t.

A picture – Sometimes a screensaver, or a memory pops up. Some moments were really short. Like you just blinked. My kids look younger, I’ve aged, Shawna hasn’t. God’s kept me occupied, time moves on. Even the picture just vanishes, shows for 10 seconds.

It’s beautiful to name the times, but there’s more going on in Ecc 3.

There’s a portion of the drive from Cleveland to Chattanooga on 75, where you crest a hill, and you just get this amazing view of the mountains/hills that surround Chattanooga. Verse 11 is like that for me

11He has made everything appropriate in its time. He has also put eternity in their hearts, but no one can discover the work God has done from beginning to end.

We don’t just learn to look AT the seasons, we’re also meant to

LEARN HOW TO LOOK BEYOND THE SEASONS

What God is doing is greater than these seasons.

We need some handles. I am going to try to give you a few words, like a coat hanger, and let you hang teaching from the Bible on each word.

Verse 11 – God has made everything appropriate in his time.  Looking beyond the seasons when it comes to ARRANGEMENT – There’s one who is over our times (giving them to us) making them all fit, beautiful, appropriate

“Appropriate” = fitting, beautiful (opp-uncoordinated, ugly, poor timing)

Here’s what’s true – There is one who knows how to put it all together. The planting, silence, searching, mourning, building, tearing, embracing - all of it, neatly and perfectly arranged together.

You don’t live in a world where there is no rhyme, no reason, no bigger picture. That would be so painful, and so empty.

Relating to seasons, here’s what’s tough

Looking at computer code: don’t get it, even if it produces a beautiful app/webpage

Looking at embroidery: the back is a miserable mess, someone talks that, and even if you can trace what it is, a lot seems unnecessary, delicate, everything fits, everything beautiful, everything arranged

God’s fitting things into a beautiful picture is seen with Jesus.

Galatians 4:4–5 4When the time came to completion, God sent his Son…5to redeem those under the law, so that we might receive adoption as sons.

Directs disciples – when this happens, then this will happen

Our God is over time so much that Jesus can say, It is finished

How are you doing with God being over how it all is arranged? Are you growing in your trust level? Is that a struggle?

Here’s another way we learn to look beyond the seasons. Verse 11 – He has put eternity in our hearts

Looking beyond the seasons when it comes to MORE – Our creator has hardwired us for more than “times” and “seasons”

Humans know right/wrong, we’re without excuse (Romans 1). We have a God-consciousness, a moral consciousness, and at the core of who we are we have eternity consciousness

God didn’t do this with any other part of his creation, something in us thinks, we come to terms with something bigger, we are made to know and want more, not because we’re greedy, but eternity is in our hearts.

Sometimes what actually becomes challenging is that we feel the tension of knowing there’s more, but being in a world of seasons that come to an end. How many of songs on the charts deal that ache?

Several writers try to get at this concept.

“You have made us for yourself, O Lord, and our hearts are restless until they rest in You.” Augustine

“What else does this craving, and this helplessness, proclaim but that there was once in man a true happiness, of which all that now remains is the empty print and trace? This he tries in vain to fill with everything around him, seeking in things that are not there the help he cannot find in those that are, though none can help, since this infinite abyss can be filled only with an infinite and immutable object; in other words by God himself.” - Blaise Pascal, Pensées

"Most people, if they had really learned to look into their own hearts, would know that they do want, and want acutely, something that cannot be had in this world. There are all sorts of things in this world that offer to give it to you, but they never quite keep their promise [...] If I find in myself a desire which no experience in this world can satisfy, the most probable explanation is that I was made for another world." - C. S. Lewis, from Mere Christianity.

MORE – I believe it’s true – God has used this eternity-consciousness to draw you to himself. Everyone will have an eternal relationship with Jesus. You make decisions to rejection or neglect, or believe or be devoted.

You were made for eternity. Jesus talked about life, yes, new, full and abundant life right now, but also eternal life all the time

John 5:24 24“Anyone who hears my word and believes him who sent me has eternal life and will not come under judgment but has passed from death to life.

John 11:25–26 25Jesus said, “I am the resurrection and the life. The one who believes in me, even if he dies, will live. 26Everyone who lives and believes in me will never die. Do you believe this?”

How are you doing with that? I hope you’re thinking…surely there is more than what I spend time looking at: apps, jobs, dating, homework, savings, retirement, promotions. There has to be. Are you open to pursuing more? Okay, you’ve made me like this. What do you want from me? What do you want for me.

Let’s keep digging. We look beyond the seasons as we realize that no one can discover the work God has done from beginning to end.

Looking beyond the seasons when it comes to LIMITS – (The tension comes because) Our experience with time is limited compared to God

Relating to seasons of building, weeping, embracing, sewing, here’s what’s tough: we just can’t always figure it out. Even when we know it fits, even when we know we’re made for more, we don’t have the complete perspective – how do these times, set in with other times

It may be like a kid/parent relationship – bed time, snack time, nap time, vacation time, a lot of these make no sense, because they don’t have the same knowledge, they couldn’t.

Even on a grown-up scale, Jesus ran into this all the time

You aren’t reading the times or seasons rightMy hour hasn’t come yet;   he waits to come see Lazarus

Jesus was regularly doing great work, and they didn’t know the timetable

How are you doing with that?

Growing in this area isn’t just producing better predictive models. This is tricky, because we don’t just check out, we’re meant to live life. But, as we face our seasons, we have to navigate our limits

I want you to gain more traction, so notice another way we can look beyond the seasons.

14I know that everything God does will last forever; there is no adding to it or taking from it. God works so that people will be in awe of him.

Looking beyond the seasons when it comes to PERMANENCE – what God does lasts forever

When we’re in the middle of laughing, mourning, searching, being torn apart, it’s easy to wonder if there are fixed points, or is it always moving.

Surveying – we know this is accurate, authoritativeMath Problems – this formula is accurate; plug in variables

Here’s what’s true: For all these seasons of ours that change, change again, change back.  For all those things that we can’t get to stick, even when we want to –  God doesn’t have that problem. He’s permanent.

If you take your faith too casually, you might need a jolt:

Those united to Jesus through faith are held close to Him permanently.

When you rely on him totally, when you throw yourself on his mercy for your sin, when you identify with him as your everything

He doesn’t cast us out. No one can take us out of His hand. It’s what He does, and he can’t be unfaithful. FIXED POINT

Jesus came to destroy the works of the devil, and the power of death and sin permanently

These awful things won’t make a comeback. This is what He does. The gates of hell won’t prove to be too much for his people. FIXED POINT

Jesus came to make all things new permanently

life is completely full         creation is reconciled and restoredHe will get this job done, and will do this permanently

How are you doing with God’s forever promises? Are they making your steps a little more stable? Your seasons aren’t permanent, God operates on a different plane. Does that steady some things in the middle of crazy seasons and times?

We overhear a conversation of the writer talking to himself

17I said to myself, “God will judge the righteous and the wicked, since there is a time for every activity and every work.”

Looking beyond the seasons when it comes to ACCOUNTABILITY – we will all be judged, all held accountable.

If you’re just thinking, repetitive seasons, everything on repeat – it doesn’t matter, you’ve drawn a foolish and a wrong conclusion.

The theme is not do whatever you want, because it doesn’t matter

Or if you’re thinking you always better walk on complete eggshells, you’ve drawn a faulty conclusion

The theme is never DON’T bother doing or enjoying anything. It’s the opposite. We’ll talk more about what it means that God gives you lots of gifts to enjoy, but that needs to impress you.

What we’re doing with our time/seasons will be accounted for! That takes us to another time: judgment.  How are you doing with that?

CONCLUSION

There is so much more we could say. My life is going to come in seasons and times. The prayer in Psalm 90 is that the Lord would help us number our days, when the sun comes up, and we start new days of love, we would be satisfied with his love, receiving his gifts, turning toward God in all of our seasons.

But in so many ways we’re put on notice: Prepare for something beyond these seasons.

Prepare for accountability – the things forgotten/minimized/coveredAppreciate the permanence – even as you can’t hold on to thingsLive within the limits, even as you long for something fuller, greaterFollow the “more” of eternity that your heart knows is thereLet God do beautiful work in just the right times.

Ecclesiastes 3:1 – There is an occasion for everything,  and a time for every activity under heaven.

<><><><><>

3.2.2025  Brainerd  (Sunday AM)