CHRIST WAS BORN FOR THISJESUS THE SERVANTPHILIPPIANS 2:1-11

INTRO: Christmas gives us “marching orders.” What do I mean by “marching orders.” Maybe you’ve heard the phrase. When a supervisor, leader, manager, coach gives a directive as to what’s to be done next, they give marching orders.

The coach gave the team their marching orders for the big game.“We're just sitting around, waiting for our marching orders.”

Paul gives a church in ancient Greece marching orders – what Paul said to them, applies to us, and we’re going to read a passage

Philippians 2:1-11

This may be one of your favorite passages. I completely understand why.

Did you hear the multiple marching orders, the directives at the beginning to this church (and to us)?

Be united. Think the same way, have the same intensity of loveStop doing selfish things, Consider others as more important than youDon’t just be all about yourself, Adopt the same attitude that Jesus had

Clear marching orders. Church, do this. Act this way. Adopt the attitude that Jesus exemplified. If those are our marching orders, we especially zero in on Christ Jesus and what characterized him.

Our series is Christ Was Born for This. The connection I want you to see in Philippians 2 is that Christ was born so that we might have these clear “marching orders.”  The manger, Joseph/Mary, shepherds, angels, First Noel, that gives us marching orders.

One of the most powerful descriptions of Jesus is found in verse 6

who, existing in the form of God, did not consider equality with God as something to be exploited.

Exploit means to take something and use it just for your own advantage

Jesus doesn’t EXPLOIT his STATUS.

Jesus exists eternally (there was never a time where he didn’t exist in the form of God).  “Form of God” could potentially be misunderstood

Word originally (morphe) FORM = that which truly and fully expresses the being which underlies it

Paul says that Jesus existed in the form of God, he’s explaining that Jesus truly and fully expresses the essence of God.

A form is what we can observe, almost like an outer coat. The only problem with that comparison, is that we tend to separate it (the coat/person), and we can’t do that with Jesus (and being God).

We can’t separate them because Jesus is God, he has always been God, he has always existed as the full expression of what it means to be God

John 17:5 – Now, Father, glorify me in your presence with that glory I had with you before the world existed.

Jesus doesn’t exploit his status as God.

A little embarrassing to me, but I remembered over 15 years ago. Long story short, I was flying from PHX to PHL, and a friend had bought the ticket. We got to the airport and he handed me the boarding pass and said, “enjoy the seat.” He had bought me a first class ticket. I had status

Board the airplane in the first group. Would you like something to eat/drink. Of course.

Silly now, but it also feels pretty human. I would be so willing to exploit something so small for my advantage. Jesus never does that. I have never heard this better expressed than this:

Jesus had glory with the Father before the world began.  He possessed all the majesty of deity, performed all its functions and enjoyed all its prerogatives. He was adored by his Father and worshipped by the angels. He was invulnerable to pain, frustration and embarrassment. His supremacy was total, his satisfaction complete, his Blessedness perfect, Such a condition was not something he had secured by effort. It was the way things were, and had always been; and there was no reason why they should change. But change they did, and they changed because Christ did not insist on his rights…he did not regard being equal with God as [something to be exploited].

Jesus does the exact opposite of exploiting. Rather than seeing his status as something to be leveraged for his own personal benefit, it’s as if the way Jesus looks at it, the status makes him uniquely qualified to act in love for our good. Who else is in the position to do for others what He can do!

What drives that? How marvelous is his love, amazing grace.

7Instead he emptied himself by assuming the form of a servant, taking on the likeness of humanity. And when he had come as a man, 8he humbled himself by becoming obedient to the point of death— even to death on a cross.

Jesus EMPTIES Himself as a SERVANT

The way that this is described is like layers. Each layer is significant.

Layer #1 – He’s a SERVANT

He assumes that form = that which truly and fully expresses the being which underlies it. At his core he is a servant.

He’s taking on a nature. He has always existed as God. He assumes the form of a servant. He’s the Servant of the Lord and he is now clearly invested in us.

A servant operates with a mindset, “my status, comfort, needs, wishes aren’t prioritized. I am serving someone else.”

Process this: because of the Heavenly Father’s deepest desires for us, Jesus becomes completely attentive to what will be for our own good.

He serves us. Not our silly wishes, but he serves the deepest needs, the darkest sides, most helpless, messy situations.

He never even has to ask “what do you need now” as if he doesn’t know. He’s perfectly patient, and knows the best avenues to serve us. He’s committed to this for a lifetime. Mark 10:45 – He came to serve.

Another layer deeper: HUMANITY. What will he need to do to serve our best interests? Become a human. He does that:  “he takes on the likeness of humanity; he comes as a man” (v7).

The creation of humans is very good in the Bible (Genesis 1-2). There is something very special and unique about the creation of men and women. At the same time, humans are also deeply flawed

This comes because of sin, because of the effects of sin. Sin when it is finished brings death, effects of death. We’re all sinners, and so we all experience the damaging results that sin causes.

All of this diminishes humans. To live as a human becomes humbling.

We are a bundle of complexities

Our bodies start strong (most times, but there is the NICU) fall apart – wear/tear, memories go, ability to care, capacities diminish, masses, tumors, surgery, blockages, preexisting conditions, hereditary

Our emotions can be strong, but they also can get weaker, emotional resilience diminishes: anxious, depressed, hurt, weary, tired, overwhelmed, compulsive

Simple things like food and drink get complicated: we don’t have enough (hunger/thirst), eating disorders/addictions.

Jesus assumes a human body:

He’s God, but now He’s veiled in flesh.

He’s the Lord, but he comes as the “Little Lord Jesus” – in his humanity…vulnerable, dependent, growing, limited

Understand the humanity. He empties himself. What we know is that emptying doesn’t mean he’s less than God, and he isn’t transformed into something other than God.  It almost seems contradictory, but he empties himself by addition, not subtraction. He adds a human nature to being divine. And there’s something mysterious about how all this works.

Never once does he in his own interest or in his own defense break beyond the parameters of humanity. He was thirsty; but he provided for himself no drink. He was assaulted by the powers of hell; but he did not call on his legions of angels. Even when he saw the full cost of [emptying], he asked for no rewriting of the script. He bore the sin in his own body, endured the sorrow in his human soul and redeemed the church with his human blood. The power which carried the world, stilled the tempest and raised the dead was never used to make his own conditions of service easier. Neither was the prestige he enjoyed in heaven exploited to relax the rules of engagement. [He deployed] no resources beyond those of his Spirit-filled humanness.

Does that give you something of a picture of what Jesus experienced?

The deepest layer: OBEDIENT TO DEATH

Total investment in the well-being of someone else. Supreme sacrifice, paying the ultimate price

Death on the cross – not death of natural causes, not death as a celebrated heroic martyr, but for several people his execution is no more than a solution to an inconvenient Passover problem, just 1 more pitiful example that you should never mess with the Roman Empire or the Jerusalem temple establishment.

Jesus goes to the fullest extent, deeply serving us. The shedding of blood, absorbing God’s righteous wrath, atoning for centuries of sin and rebellion, bearing the weight of the curse of sin. He serves our deepest need as only he can. He doesn’t exploit, he does embrace his role as a servant.

Humans are estranged —> death on the cross means we’re welcomedWe’re dirty —> he serves us by washing us cleanWe’re enslaved —> he creates the conditions for our freedom

We stand condemned and guilty —> he serves us in a way where we become completely and eternally forgiven

We’re scarred and wounded —> he heals, restores, and makes us permanently whole

What wondrous love is this, o my soul, o my soul?

Paul helps us see: down, down, down [servant, human, death] —> only to jolt us. What we naturally see as a falling apart, disintegration and humiliation, God sees as an exaltation!

9For this reason God highly exalted him and gave him the name that is above every name, 10so that at the name of Jesus every knee will bow— in heaven and on earth and under the earth— 11and every tongue will confess that Jesus Christ is Lord, to the glory of God the Father.

Highly exalted – the glory he should always have, now unveiled, humans everywhere will know and see: this is HIM! His name is the highest, His name is the greatest, His name stands above them all.

Extent of that honor – name above every other name, every knee bows.

physical signs of respect – trying to stand up, hold doors open, officers salute, hand goes over your heart, hat comes off; here – every knee bows. In his presence that is exactly what should be done.

Full recognition – every tongue confessing – Jesus is Lord, Jesus is God Almighty, and the Father is pleased by this. This, this is Christ the King!!!

No wonder the Christmas carols we sing come in pretty big

HARK, O COME, JOY TO THE WORLD, GOOD CHRISTIAN MEN REJOICE. All caps, really big.

So, much more we could say, but you don’t want to miss the opportunity to make a really important connection. The manger, angel, Mary/Joseph, wise men, shepherds, Bethlehem. We know the Christmas story. We know where it all led. We see depth in ways that go beyond a Christmas card or simple nativity scene. All of that is Jesus taking on the likeness of humans.

All of this we draw on to see exactly how WE ARE supposed to live. Adopt the same attitude!  We actually have marching orders. Marching orders can be really simple.

In obedient devotion to the Father, Jesus serves us.In obedient devotion to Jesus, we serve others.

Jesus doesn’t exploit status.Jesus empties himself as a servant. Jesus embraces that role

Whatever status I have (a son/daughter of God, coheir with Jesus, adopted, loved, kingdom of priests, part of the bride/body/temple). I am not meant to exploit any of that status. But I am meant to embrace the role of a servant. If anything, the high status I have been given by my Father means that I am uniquely qualified to use all of those privileges to serve.

We adopt a servant attitude, an attitude we’ve seen demonstrated in the most perfect way from the moment Jesus was conceived.

CONCLUSION

Let’s get very real: If I put it into context of Phil 2, adopting this attitude or mindset starts in our church relationships.

What if the church was this loving, complex network of relationships and connections of people who choose to SERVE each other, looking out for each other, taking the initiative,

what if that drives deep sacrifice. Meals, gifts, prayers, and presence, acts of kindness that aren’t random (they make total sense because we know we’ve been cared for like that).

What if we weren’t so absorbed and living with low-grade frustration by all the people who really ought to be serving us right now. What if all of that flipped? We served deep needs.

What if someone who didn’t know Jesus walked into that, and slowly observed this:

Who are these people? Why do they treat each other that way? What’s that all about.

What if Brainerd Students and Brainerd College had the reputation where it’s not just all about hype or keeping bored teenagers entertained, but middle school/high school and college students that are following Jesus as servants, genuinely caring about others. They’ve adopted the attitude and mindset!

Strangers welcomed in. The next generation loved and served. An older generation not forgotten but honored and treasured until Jesus takes them home.

This is the community of Jesus. We’re servants. Where do I get that from. You ever heard of the Christmas story? It gives us our marching orders for how we treat each other in the church.

Then the ripples go out from there. All of life turns outward.

Sacrifices for others, even when there isn’t reciprocation

A lof of “Just Because” efforts and initiatives

Cost – as much as we might have to bear

Initiative – as many times as we might have to take

Our lives get poured out so that more and more people experience and enjoy all the grace God has for them. Our Savior assumed the form of a servant, and was made in the likeness of humans so that we could act like an army with clear marching orders adopting his same mindset.  Christ was born for this!

<><><><><>

12.07.2025  Brainerd  (Sunday AM)