ARE YOU IN?NEITHER DO IJOHN 8:1-11

We will begin today by reading our text (8:1-11).

Such a beautiful passage of Scripture. Such a helpful passage. I want you to appreciate what Jesus says and does, and what that means for YOU! That’s where I want to go.

But, we need to look at something first. In my translation I have this note:

The earliest mss do not include 7:53–8:11. Other mss include all or some of the passage after Jn 7:36,44,52; 21:25; or Lk 21:38.

So, this leaves me/us needing to thread a needle: I feel the responsibility to look at this note more, but I don’t think the best use of the vast majority of our time this morning is diving deep into a super-technical discussion.

Take a few minutes and try to simplify something. What’s this note mean?

Unusual: none exactly like this, only a few even similar to this. John wrote this book; that original writing was copied, and copies were carefully copied. The people who copied took that seriously (not like the telephone game), and a handful of the copies we have that are the oldest don’t have this passage in them. Read the earliest Christian writings of pastors and teachers, they don’t refer to it (they don’t seem to have it).

Why’s it here?  We have many copies from a little bit later that do have the passage. A little bit later, we have pastors/teachers referring to it

A twist: occasionally it floats, it’s sometimes in different places, in a different setting (even Luke)

This is unique enough to raise some questions about whether John originally had this as part of his writing. At the same time, we can understand why this has stuck: squares with the teaching of Jesus, and squares with the other encounters that Jesus had. These are very Jesus-like things to say and do.

Of course some think it’s a big coverup, and use something like this to say: the whole thing can’t be trusted, they’re trying to hide things

That charge doesn’t land for me: because you’re reading notes like this in almost every Bible. Nothing is hidden here.

The most convincing explanation to me. I’m convinced that that this really happened exactly as it is written and that was passed along to first Christians and then more Christians so it lingered (which is why we’re spending time in the passage today), even if also it seems like there’s a good chance wasn’t in the original gospel of John.

If that wasn’t far enough down the rabbit hole for your taste, good news for you, it goes 10 miles deeper. Favor: I don’t think the best use of your next 25 minutes is on Google tracking all of this down.

Seriously, if you think it would serve your faith, I am happy to make some recommendations to you.

I think it would be most profitable to ask a few questions: What’s really going on in this passage? How does Jesus navigate it all? And then where does it leave you? So, that’s our roadmap.

Let’s start with WHAT’S REALLY GOING ON?

Disruption in 2-3. Jesus experiences a very intentional, completely unnecessary disruption to his teaching.

A woman is shamed. A woman meets Jesus at her most vulnerable, most exposed, most humiliating moment.

The scene is a crowd around her. Such a spectacle, it invites people to be nosy, invites people to speculate, invites people to condemn. The respected people have created a scene.

This is a SET-UP. There are just several sketchy things

“Catchers” – how did you just happen to catch this?

Where’s the man? Moses is quoted, but it’s a couple there, not just one of the individuals.

It seems clear that she’s an expendable pawn in a bigger scheme

They disrupt Jesus’ teaching; they undermine him; they give him a lose/lose proposition where he can’t be neutral. Maybe their thinking is: at some point all these people around Jesus, the tax collectors like Matthew and Zacchaeus, the sinful woman anointing him, sinners, weak people have to be held to account. Make an example to force his hand.

The whole episode is so dehumanizing – they’ve chosen to make this one lady a pawn in their scheme.

No one really deserves that. Some people seem to ask for it (needing to be really public, prideful) – what goes around comes around.

A lot of the time that’s not what’s happening: the world has a very unkind way of exposing us

Magnifying our worst moments, finding dirt, smear tactics, failed marriage, family history, dismissed from a job (questionable behavior, suspect decisions, poor performance), I had an addiction [no, I can talk about it, it’s part of my story]

This becomes embarrassing, potentially scarring

What’s really going on is a mess!

Have you ever seen a kid make a total mess? What do we do now? But, what about grown-ups when we make a spiritual mess of things?

How does Jesus navigate the mess we make of life?

Jesus writes in the ground. What did he write? We don’t know. More than one writer points out that Jesus is taking eyes off of all that shame.

If that’s His intention, which seems very likely, it’s a kind thing to do, and it’s a courageous thing to do. Drawing attention away from the woman and to himself.

Parents, teachers do that when they feel like kids are open to embarrassment or feeling unusually vulnerable. They deflect attention.

The Lord sees and moves to cover (even from the Garden of Eden). It’s the heart of the Lord to bear shame that isn’t his to bear, it’s ours. But, he chooses to be numbered with people who sit under judgment.

By writing, Jesus gives time to allow some mercy to kick in (it doesn’t). A few people are intending for this woman to stay on the hot seat. They persist (7). They won’t quit. But, notice where this goes!

Jesus doesn’t dismiss (easy shortcut) – what’s the big deal people?

No cover-up, PR spin, legal technicality with a wink (we all know what happened, but…)

Why? She needs more than short-term relief. Because bullies are relentless. This woman does have a life in front of her. She’s going to need more than spin, technicalities, more than just the problem temporarily going away.

Not to mention. Sin needs to be dealt with. We also need to be real: like all sin, sexual sin is awful. “I am only hurting myself” is a lie. You don’t grow as a person when you sin. You shrink. You become less of you, not more.

And we pray to God for those patterns to be changed in our lives.

He doesn’t diminish who God really is and what that means for us. The Bible is a record of love, and it’s also a record of consistent and even flagrant sin in the face of a perfectly holy God. It’s never that sin isn’t a big deal.

Jesus clarifies this perfect standard: The only one who can judge and execute judgment perfectly is the one who DOES NOT SIN (7). That’s a powerful word and an unbelievably high standard.

Note: This isn’t meant to grind the world to a halt: courts can’t render verdict, mom/dad can’t discipline, teacher can’t say “you cheated”; the whole world would break down

On one day in Jerusalem, there was a lot of clarity given: The rest of us not named Jesus Christ should have a lot of humility, and a healthy dose of suspicion of our own judgmentalism

Jesus doesn’t just take the easy cases. He takes yours and mine. Jesus navigates the messes we make of our lives.

Where does that really leave you?

What is the endgame that Jesus has in mind.

We read some of the results. People one-by-one start walking away (9). Oldest leave first (doesn’t surprise me. Life has beat them up a little harder)

But, for just a moment: I don’t think it’s a stretch to think there were 2 kinds of people that walked away

Those who were stubborn and proud. Someone that just hates being proven wrong or not getting their way. So, they walk away, wait for another day, find another trap, use another person if they have to

There is another alternative. Those who were humbled and convicted walk away

I do believe the woman received grace from Jesus (undeserved kindness of God to you). But there’s grace for others from Jesus in his words making you ask yourself the hard question.

A sign of grace (that doesn’t really feel like grace) is when we have to sort through our own sin. When it becomes the priority. It’s way too easy to notice the sin of others. It’s way too easy to miss our hypocrisy

When Jesus moves you from “I’m better than…” to “Lord, have mercy. I’m actually the same…” That’s grace – we’re the convicted. You drop a stone, you look in the mirror, and almost feel the urge to come back to Jesus and say, “I am so, so sorry!”

Is that where you are (maybe a bit): a little smug, somewhat judgmental, self-righteous, especially toward specific people?

you’ve kept score (you’re winning), actually now though the Lord is pushing you – what’s gained by my resentments, my self-elevation

Jesus loves me too much to make my home there. Grace to the one who picked up a stone, and now drops it.

Back to the woman. The crowd is gone. What comes next? Jesus didn’t just use her to score some points against the Pharisees. That wasn’t what this was about.

I hear ZERO harshness

Don’t ever let me catch you doing ____If you ever go back to this, I can’t help you next time.

He asks a question in verse 10 (where did everyone go?)

It’s more like hearing Jesus tenderly and surgically remind this person in front of him, “You are not expendable. Your life doesn’t exist for you to prove a point to everyone else. There’s a future for you that doesn’t involve you blowing up your life. I am making possible a path where you find usefulness in the purposes of God, in life-giving, life-filling ways, as my friend, for my glory.”

Jesus’ discernment, decisions, judgments always incorporate grace. always does right by each person. He makes a pronouncement and gives clear instruction: No condemnation, leave sin far behind (11)

Those words are beautiful, but if all you do is say them, that only takes you so far

Your grandma can think you hung the moon and choose to never see one wrong thing you’ve done, but that’s not going to help when you’re dealing with being under legitimate condemnation

I can tell myself every morning: today is a beautiful day, and I will do the right thing today, every…single…time. Again, that will break down.

The pronouncement of Jesus comes with authority/power

“No condemnation”, that is speaking to her STATUS – that’s only meaningful if you have the authority. He does. sin can be forgiven! YOU are not going to be condemned for this. Jesus speaks this word. Only he can, only he has not sinned.

“Leave sin behind” speaks to her FUTURE – that’s only meaningful if you have the power. Leaving a life of sin is not only desirable, but also possible because Jesus sends the Holy Spirit to us to come into us, and work powerfully. Your life looks very different moving forward. God making his home in us. Jesus speaks this word. Only he can!

Hear Jesus: No one here is condemning you, including the only one that could. He’s actually come to save not condemn. It’s time for you to leave everything that’s causing death. It’s time for you to come alive because One has come who changes everything.

CONCLUSION

The most important thing you can hear today: If Jesus can really see the worst parts of us, and we can walk away experiencing grace, then he must love us very deeply!

This is a powerful account of Jesus. My goal wasn’t to bring you to a heartwarming conclusion. Plenty of movies, documentaries, romance novels can do that. I’ve wanted to bring you to a person who is just as alive as he is in this encounter.

My last question for us to wrestle with was where does grace leave YOU?

I’ve noticed a fairly repeated pattern. In the gospel writings, a person has a dramatic encounter with Jesus. And Jesus will say something very profound to them.

But, often the plot doesn’t fully resolve. There’s this uncertainty as to what happened next for them – what did they do as a result?

I have a theory as to why the Bible reads this way: the way the door is left open seems to be an invitation – opportunity to assess. What am I going to do? Implied is this same Jesus operates in grace in Chattanooga in 2025. He’s just as loving, shows just as much grace, and cares just as much about you personally.

Implied is that YOU should come with your own shame, vulnerabilities, embarrassment, sexual sin, self-righteousness, pride, pain.

The account that doesn’t resolve could be an invitation for you (yes YOU!) to drop your rock-throwing, for you to come to Jesus, hear “no condemnation”, new life through Jesus?

<><><><><>

7.6.2025  Brainerd  (Sunday AM)