NOT A STRAIGHT LINESTABILIZING YOUR SOULGENESIS 37

INTRO: Each week, we have a mixture of sweet and sad conversations:

Some people are experiencing enduring hard, hard lossVery unclear path ahead for loved ones, hard to know the right pathSuch a season of success that lots of things are changing (for good)Concerning situation where really nothing can be done on your part

What each of my conversations have in common is that they can be hard to find stability. What is a new normal?

What stabilizes your life? What do you have to have for you to know things will be okay? Think about that. Be honest.

Is it money (1 more paycheck), control (some semblance of it), approval, family, Health / friends?

And where and how does GOD come into that equation? In the end, how much does God stabilize your life?

not in a fuzzy, “faith is pretty important to me,” but more like…without God personally in my life, I fall apart

If the answer is I am not sure, or if you’re exploring faith, willing to go deeper, but at this point, it really hasn't made a huge day-to-day difference, what an opportunity we have to think about it

life may be choppy, or really settled or it’s a season of change even as lots of good things falling into place, we can look at someone whose life was anything but stable

We will come back to that question. First, I want us to look at Genesis 39. We’re walking through the life of Joseph: Not a straight line, not a smooth ride. When we left Joseph, he had been trafficked by his brothers, sold into slavery. Whatever comes next in Genesis 39 seems like it would be tough.

Gen 39 divides into 3 sections. And with each, you kind of have a reaction, let’s start with WHAT A TURNAROUND!!  (1-6a)

1Now Joseph had been taken to Egypt. An Egyptian named Potiphar, an officer of Pharaoh and the captain of the guards, bought him from the Ishmaelites who had brought him there.

We aren’t primed for any good news. He went DOWN to Egypt. Life feels like it’s headed down. But you notice some powerful words

2The Lord was with Joseph, and he became a successful man, serving in the household of his Egyptian master. 3When his master saw that the Lord was with him and that the Lord made everything he did successful,

Noticeable success is followed by greater responsibility. It often works that way.

4Joseph found favor with his master and became his personal attendant. Potiphar also put him in charge of his household and placed all that he owned under his authority. 5From the time that he put him in charge of his household and of all that he owned, the Lord blessed the Egyptian’s house because of Joseph. The Lord’s blessing was on all that he owned, in his house and in his fields. 6He left all that he owned under Joseph’s authority; he did not concern himself with anything except the food he ate.

God had told Abraham that nations of the earth would be blessed through him/his family. That’s happened. Household/field operating well. Direct tie to the Lord

We come to the YOU’VE GOT TO BE KIDDING!!. This is where things unravel quickly, at least from our perspective. It’s a mess.

6Now Joseph was well-built and handsome. Someone notices.

7After some time his master’s wife looked longingly at Joseph and said, “Sleep with me.”

This is a bold, brazen temptation. Joseph, from an earthly standpoint, still really remains vulnerable (master-slave). Her words are short, but Joseph’s first response to her isn’t short.

8But he refused. “Look,” he said to his master’s wife, “with me here my master does not concern himself with anything in his house, and he has put all that he owns under my authority. 9No one in this house is greater than I am. He has withheld nothing from me except you, because you are his wife. So how could I do this immense evil, and how could I sin against God?”

The language used gives us the clues we need to understand what Joseph thinks about it. This would be wickedness and sin. This would be sinning against God, against neighbor.

She continues to be persistent. “Whenever you’re ready, you know where I am.” There is an open opportunity for Joseph. We talked last week about the rationalizations and excuses we could make for sin.

10Although she spoke to Joseph day after day, he refused to go to bed with her.

Then, there was the day that changed Joseph’s life

11Now one day he went into the house to do his work, and none of the household servants were there. 12She grabbed him by his garment and said, “Sleep with me!” But leaving his garment in her hand, he escaped and ran outside. 13When she saw that he had left his garment with her and had run outside, 14she called her household servants. “Look,” she said to them, “my husband brought a Hebrew man to make fools of us. He came to me so he could sleep with me, and I screamed as loud as I could. 15When he heard me screaming for help, he left his garment beside me and ran outside.”

The relationship she has with her husband obviously isn’t good.And she plays on some prejudice, it seems as well – “Hebrew.” She stages things for effect when Potiphar comes home.

16She put Joseph’s garment beside her until his master came home. 17Then she told him the same story: “The Hebrew slave you brought to us came to make a fool of me, 18but when I screamed for help, he left his garment beside me and ran outside.” 19When his master heard the story his wife told him—“These are the things your slave did to me”—he was furious

Kids: have you ever gotten in trouble for something you didn’t do? Does that bother you, make you mad?

Joseph is a young man. Out of his country, as a slave. There are no appeals he can make. If you’re just a neutral observer, you would have to say he has no chance. If he was a product of luck, it’s over. If he was successful because of religious reasons, that doesn’t seem to help him at all.

Tr: you come to the third section. You could even ask “Is there even a need for one?” Potiphar is angry. Joseph could’ve been killed.

He was furious 20and had him thrown into prison, where the king’s prisoners were confined. So Joseph was there in prison.

As a matter of fact, it would make sense for him to be killed. It does make me wonder if people really guessed the whole story, but had to do something to save face.

But, the story takes a crazy turn: SOMETHING BIGGER IS HAPPENING

He could’ve been forgotten. How many people are unjustly accused in prisons/prison camps around the world? Language from the beginning is revived, plus others:

21But the Lord was with Joseph and extended kindness to him. He granted him favor with the prison warden.

Responsibility follows, and the success/blessings of the Lord extend – Prison receives the blessing

22The warden put all the prisoners who were in the prison under Joseph’s authority, and he was responsible for everything that was done there. 23The warden did not bother with anything under Joseph’s authority, because the Lord was with him, and the Lord made everything that he did successful.

Wow! Things turn. Things change. At the same time Joseph was a slave and now he’s a prisoner. That’s the picture in Genesis 39.

I want to ask everyone to do something: What is something that really stands out to you in this passage? If you feel comfortable, could you share that with someone?

I wish I had a big whiteboard and we could jot things down. That would be great to put a lot of your thoughts together.

Can I share a few things right on the surface I really appreciate?

I love how Joseph fights temptation –

Resists & resists some more (despite being in a situation where he could've made a dozen excuses or justifications) – contrast Eve/Adam, David on the rooftop

Sees things as they are in the sight of God. God honors the costly “NO’s” we say; when we deny ungodliness, worldly lust, God is pleased by that.

I love how God will often use His people to be a blessing.

Seasons of success – you achieve, produce, lead, serve, organize, coach, develop, build, coordinate, teach, manage, decide wisely; good at what you do; you’re a very desirable hire, others flourish because you’re there. Favor of the Lord.

Yes on a big scale – C-suite, owners, famous;  “small” scale – family, caregiver, job with no direct reports, just a few

That’s a gift from God for his purposes. A lot of success may not last forever. I would pray that when it happens for many of you, you would steward it really well like Joseph.

I wanted to spend time in Gen 39, because that will help us answer the original questions: What stabilizes your life and how does God fit into that? There has to be more going on than “Follow a Joseph formula. Do ___ and ____ will happen! Be good looking, be a whiz kid. Have enormous amounts of self-control. Try really hard, keep your chin up” and you will have a stable life. Does it always work that way?

A lot of time is compressed, and we don’t always know what’s going on in Joseph’s head. You carry heavy burdens, and you need something more than easy formulas. You carry big dreams, and it’s going to take more than 123.

What stabilized Joseph through the highest of highs and the lowest of lows is the same thing that can stabilize you. In that way, although Joseph is incredibly special, but he is not necessarily unique

A stabilizing force for Joseph is in verse 2,3, 21, 23

“THE LORD WAS WITH HIM” [2, 3, 21, 23]

God had promised to “be with” his grandpa/dad, he’s experiencing that

What did that feel like, day-to-day – I am not sure we know (life is wonderful every day, I doubt it). There had to be several days over the course of several years where this seemed hard to grasp. If it’s only about feelings, I am sure he didn’t feel it 100% of the time.

But, I really believe he knows that the Lord is with Him. Not a force or energy, but a person who doesn’t leave.

This theme runs through the whole Bible

Psalm 23 – even though I walk through the valley of the shadow of death – he is with me

Isaiah 41:10 10Do not fear, for I am with you;

Isaiah 43:2 2When you pass through the waters, I will be with you and the rivers will not overwhelm you, When you walk through the fire, you will not be scorched and the flame will not burn you.

When Jesus comes he is named Immanuel – God with us

Upgraded experience of the presence of the Lord – I am with you, I won’t leave you, my Spirit will be in you

What Christians enjoy now is hard to explain. This invisible but very real person is with us. You’re stabilized because he’s with you

With you bringing all of his power, wisdom

Infusing you with strength, hope, courage resilience, when your levels are depleted

There is even a deeper more full on experience of his presence

Revelation 21:3 3Then I heard a loud voice from the throne: Look, God’s dwelling is with humanity, and he will live with them. They will be his peoples, and God himself will be with them and will be their God.

The lonely, the person that doesn’t quite fit in, the grieving, the person experiencing change, loss, success, growth à What stabilizes you? THAT

Do you have that? So much better than “it’s just me against the world.” You might be really tough. But is that better than having the creator and designer of everything that is WITH YOU.

Something else stabilizes Joseph21 – But the Lord was with Joseph and extended kindness to him.  He granted him favor with the prison warden.

“THE LORD EXTENDED KINDNESS (FAITHFUL LOVE).” [21]

The word “kindness” is the word Chesed. Normally it’s translated faithful love or steadfast love. This IS the mark of how God consistently interacts with his people [part of a covenant]

Exodus 34:6–7 The Lord is… abounding in faithful love and truth, maintaining faithful love to a thousand generations

Psalm 86:5 – For you, Lord, are kind and ready to forgive, abounding in faithful love to all who call on you.

God extends this to Joseph. The image changes (what we stand on)

This the deep, loyal, faithful love. It is self-giving, and catches our attention, because we think: “I don’t deserve this. What did I ever do to be loved like that.” I pray that you’ve been loved that way, friend, teacher, coach, aunt or uncle.

This kindness or faithful love, got escalated or upgraded when Jesus came into the world. It’s even more personal – filled with grace

Mercy of Titus 3:5 He saved us—not by works of righteousness that we had done, but according to his mercyGrace of Eph 2:8 – For you are saved by grace through faith, and this is not from yourselves; it is God’s gift.Love of Rev 1:5 – Jesus Christ loves us and has set us free from our sins by his blood,

In some ways we can become our own worst enemy. We don’t help our cause at all. We get in our own way. Your life stabilizes because he extends his kindness or faithful love to you.

seeing you at your worst   rescue you from evil/darknesschange your heart from that of a disobedient selfish rebelengaging with you over the long haul for transformationproduce the kinds of things that are true good and beautiful

God loves you so much. That stabilizes. In the worst of circumstances, hard to even emotionally or spiritually regulate.

Nothing else stabilizes, not money, control, approval, friends, health

CONCLUSION

The question now isn’t about Joseph, but What can stabilize you?  How could a person ever receive this sort of stability? Not in a foggy sense, but in a real, come alive sense.

You can’t earn it. Joseph was stellar, but Jacob was “all over the place.” This sort of stabilizing cannot be earned

Is it just for this family (Abraham/Isaac/Jacob)? Attached to it (part of a covenant, the binding agreement God chose to make with this family)

What starts out as a blessing to Abraham and his family was always going to be good news for all the people, light of the world, not just one nation/family, blessings to that family extend to all nations. New covenant Jesus makes through his death. Covenant with all who will come to him. Turn to Jesus

Jesus says “come to me” and you come. He won’t turn you away.Jesus says turn from everything else, and you turn.Jesus says believe me (Lord, Savior) and you trust.Jesus says receive what I have done for you, and you receive it/Him.

Jesus says profess that faith in me, and you do. You now are identified with Jesus. You are “in Jesus.”

Jesus says “follow me” and you follow. He doesn’t let you go or leave you, but through the Spirit he guides.

This stabilizes you. It’s not just a transaction, but it is the deepest of relationships, where you experience and enjoy for the rest of your life and into eternity all the grace that God has for you through Jesus Christ.

That’s an invitation to everyone. Those for the first time, those for the 10,000th time. We’re in a room surrounded by people who God has extended kindness to, who God has come to live in.

As I replay conversations this week, as I think about all the noise in my life that seems to make me wobbly, unsteady. Something stabilizes:

the LORD is with us, the LORD extends his kindness to us

<><><><><>

8.24.2025    Brainerd  (Sunday AM)