ARE YOU IN?BRINGING JESUS INTO THE EQUATIONJOHN 6:1-14

TITLE SLIDE:   I still remember the first time I got to see the Statue of Liberty. Because I had seen 1000 pictures of it, I knew its features, and so seeing it didn’t take me by surprise. But what you realize when you’re onsite, when you have an expert guide walking through, you just see things you’ve never seen before.

Today, could that be something like hearing John 6 and the story of the feeding of the 5000? I would guess for so many, it all sounds so familiar. You know the features. But, what if we look a little closer. Full disclosure, you don’t have an expert guide. Today, you have a Baptist preacher. But, actually there’s more, right? You DO have the Holy Spirit, who can open your eyes and help you be more impressed than you've ever been with the way God works! So, let’s do this today.

(1) Let’s start by reading it. (2) Then we can take a slower walk through it (almost like a tour). And then after we’ve toured, (3) I think it would make a lot of sense to step away and process for a second.

First reading: John 6:1-14

Let’s look a little more closely.

1After this, Jesus crossed the Sea of Galilee (or Tiberias). 2A huge crowd was following him because they saw the signs that he was performing by healing the sick.

We have a crowd impressed by signs (which comes with plus/minus)

It’s not a bad thing to be drawn to Jesus. Ever. What else should they have done? NOT followed him?

And yet, there’s this: a lot of times, people have an angle when they come to Jesus (maybe they like the show, maybe he could work into their life-plan, or work to their advantage in some capacity)

Probably not unlike today: Some people identify with Jesus because of cultural reasons, spiritual experience, deeply personal, longing for something bigger (and you still haven’t found what you’re looking for). A crowd follows.

3Jesus went up a mountain and sat down there with his disciples. 4Now the Passover, a Jewish festival, was near.

If we were to try to find something comparable, we might hear “Now it was around the Fourth of July. It sends you a signal.

Passover had historical, even spiritual dimensions. Think about it: For ancient Israel…in Egypt, they had a prescribed meal with bread. A rescue comes (blood over your door). And then there’s a water crossing that was miraculous

God's provision was REALLY stunning – You could imagine the rank and file person saying to themselves back then: "This is really happening!"

Passover was a politically supercharged time (oppressed by foreign rule (Rome), over quickly, it happened once, maybe again.)

Put that together, look a little more deeply, a crowd, not just any crowd, a crowd that’s eager to see Jesus because of miracles. Combined that with a season where emotions ran high.

But, this story won’t just be Jesus and the crowd.

5So when Jesus looked up and noticed a huge crowd coming toward him, he asked Philip, “Where will we buy bread so that these people can eat?” 6He asked this to test him, for he himself knew what he was going to do.

Philip is drawn into the story because of Jesus. This is a very helpful portion of scripture because we actually get pulled in to what Jesus was doing. We know the motivation of Jesus in this instance.

Jesus was giving a test. There are all kinds of tests.

Mastery of a body of knowledge – probably a lot of exams, and tests are going to be given. There will be A’s, B’s, C’s and also a few other grades made.

Pass/Fail tests. If you want to get licensing, or the bar, or your boards, there are only 2 results.

Diagnostic tests. Assessing where we are. Entrance exams or even personality exams, or how you approach things.

This test of Philip on that day was diagnostic, and it definitely exposed a few things (the question was where will we buy bread so that these people can eat)

7Philip answered him, “Two hundred denarii worth of bread wouldn’t be enough for each of them to have a little.”

Philip lived in the real world. Sometimes the over the top nature of some of these kinds of stories may almost make it like legends, tales.

Listen: this is a real account. This particular story is told 4 times in the gospels: Matthew, Mark, Luke, John. Each one felt like it was critical to include in their story. We’re hearing Philip talk.

Why ask Philip? He was from that area (I love this). Who would be the best person to call, how this logistically could happen. Who would have a friend, a connection in the area.

Philip applies problem-solving techniques. [processes options]. If that’s the problem we’re trying to solve, we’re in way over our head (what we don’t have and realistically could never get still wouldn’t be enough). Jesus, we have a math problem. It just doesn’t work!

hypothetical 200 denarii < (is so much less than) what it would take. It’s not even 1 in a million. This isn’t a long shot. This is impossible.

So, this was a test. Philip got tested, what grade do you give him? Surely, it can’t be an A. We’ll probably want to be kind, but seriously what grade would you give him.

Two other characters get spotlighted as well.

8One of his disciples, Andrew, Simon Peter’s brother, said to him, 9“There’s a boy here who has five barley loaves and two fish—but what are they for so many?”

Again, I love that Jesus includes others. We’re not told that Andrew is tested. He just voluntarily enters the scene (which I kind of like). Andrew is someone in Scripture that is regularly bringing someone to Jesus.

Different from Philip who it seems like just doesn’t have a category for this having a happy ending. For Philip, it’s just not even worth asking the question, doesn’t even track with what could happen. Andrew seems different: We have this kid, this small something. But in the end, he also lives in a real world. Andrew’s assessment

what we have < (is significantly less than) what it would take

For Andrew, let’s be honest: This just isn’t going to happen.

I know it doesn’t say that Andrew gets tested, but if it was a test for him, what grade do you give Andrew?

We have Philip and Andrew, in the end both land close to the same place.

10Jesus said, “Have the people sit down.” There was plenty of grass in that place; so they sat down. The men numbered about five thousand. 11Then Jesus took the loaves, and after giving thanks he distributed them to those who were seated—so also with the fish, as much as they wanted. 12When they were full, he told his disciples, “Collect the leftovers so that nothing is wasted.”

There’s a way you could read this, and it being a miracle wouldn’t be the first thing you think of. Details: sit down, plenty of grass, total # of men

Jesus is the chief distributor, prayer that’s been prayed a billion times [Blessed are you, Lord our God, King of the universe, who brings forth bread from the earth]

The people eat as much as they wanted, full, pick up the leftovers

To just read that on the surface seems like it’s saying – really good day, and we got a lot of people fed. I worked in a camp kitchen where we served 1000 or so a day. A bunch of people ate, they seemed pretty full.

But this is a MIRACLE. Jesus has done the IMPOSSIBLE.

13So they collected them and filled twelve baskets with the pieces from the five barley loaves that were left over by those who had eaten. 14When the people saw the sign he had done, they said, “This truly is the Prophet who is to come into the world.”

You can’t help but hear some echoes to something that happened centuries before in Israel: one day manna showed up, and it did for another 4 decades. And Jesus has just done something like that in Galilee.

This all is just vintage Jesus.

The scale is crazy, especially for then, but there’s a simplicity to it.

This miracle is also so full and generous. No one ever accused Jesus of being stingy.

The miracle is public. People knew what went down and had to make sense of it. And they do.

I don’t know how open you are to believing in miracles, something beyond normal human explanation. There is more to what is true and good and beautiful than what we can chart, give airtight explanations for. There’s something bigger/better.

So, we’ve taken a tour. But we need to process what we’ve read. There are lots of things to takeaway. I want you to concentrate on Philip and Andrew. They were missing something as they formulated how this would work.

Remember they’ve seen a lame man walk after 38 years. They’ve been present as Jesus turned water into wine. Who knows how many other things, but as Jesus asked Philip questions, he didn’t have eyes to see the impossible happening. It just didn’t work.

They were really missing Jesus. I wonder if this could be the main question: what happens when we bring Jesus into our equations.

what we have + JESUS = more than enough (more than we can ask or imagine). There’s part of me that wants to say it really is just Jesus, and he’s more than enough. But in this story, Jesus brings the disciples in, he brings a boy in, the disciples distribute the bread. He intentionally goes about His work bringing Philip and Andrew and the boy into this.

I think that equation can serve you, but it’s worth looking really closely.

A phrase caught my attention: that is ridiculously inadequate resources. It’s the moment we get really honest about what we (don’t) have and what we can bring (don’t bring) to the table. Too often we kid ourselves, and we don’t see our weaknesses and limits for what they truly are.

We think we’re strong, but strength can be a pretty fragile thing. We’ll just man up, power through, buckle down and things will change. But does it work like that?

Or maybe we try to change things through a dozen side comments, manipulative suggestions (I am making for the 27th time), eye rolls, deep sighs, dirty looks but they don’t really bring about change

So, we stew on things…internal stress, ulcers, incessant worry —> things are much better now, because I did this.

What I am advocating is not just checking out. It’s just getting honest about my weakness. What I bring is just not enough: Philip is right. A couple of times this week, I was reminded that what I have isn’t enough.

Also, we have to make sure we aren’t just filling the word Jesus as if that could just stand in for any nebulous “higher power” or “faith tradition.” You can’t just substitute whatever or whoever and have the equation work.

the One who was sent by the Father, the One who is God in the fleshholy beyond measure, who is compassionate beyond comprehension

the One who is perfect in all of his ways (thoughts, motives, actions, attitudes, intentions)

the One who sacrificially offered himself up for our sinthe One who was buried because he really did die in our place

the One who took the ugly side of death, chewed it up, spit it out, rose again, and conquered, and put all things under his feet

the One who rules victoriously at the right hand of the father, calling every shot, holding the world together each millisecond, and listening to our prayers. Judge, Ruler, Lord, Prophet, Priest, King, our Savior, our only hope in life and death

THAT JESUS.

And THAT Jesus is more than enough. Just to clarify, more than enough ≠ exactly what you want/think would match your image of the perfect life.

Neither Andrew or Philip had any clue at the beginning of this where it would all go. And Jesus knew exactly what he was going to do. So helpful to remember. The designs that they might’ve had when they woke up that morning near the Sea of Galilee, likely didn’t include what we call the feeding of the 5000 – A crowd, a testing question, oh we’re feeding them, ridiculously inadequate options, a miracle, leftovers

And it’s so meaningful, because as the day unfolded, they weren’t author, director, producer of the day, but they weren’t exactly spectators. You should realize that these are the things that change people.

You aren’t the author/director/producer of everything in your life either. That’s actually good news. That would be so pressure packed. And God may be writing a very different story than the one you thought should be written. But, when Jesus is added to the equation, it will always be MORE THAN ENOUGH.

What he’s doing will be good. even if it’s with some heartbreakWhat he’s doing will be best. even if it doesn't have a happy ending here on earthWhat he’s doing will be perfect. even if you still feel the world is broken for now.

More than enough often means walking through hardship and pain Here’s the truth: I don’t want to curate a series of all my humbling realizations, glaring weaknesses, our regrets, our meltdowns. God doesn’t hide his face from any of them.

CONCLUSION

Just be prepared for parts of this equation to surprise you. I never even thought about…

In a decade, God walking me through dark days and deep grief, endure, smile, grow, change. More than enough.

After death, a massive failure, God rebuilding my life, picking up the broken pieces. More than enough.

After a complicated interaction with someone close to you, God teaching me things about myself. More than enough.

After struggling to put the financial picture of your life together, God provides in an abnormal way. More than enough

We have a choice: What equation will you operate with today?

Big scale things – you may be at that decision. When it comes to the salvation of your soul, what you have is not enough. But, you bring your sin, brokenness, faith, reliance on Jesus, and Jesus is enough, Jesus is more than enough for the rescue of your life.

Small scale things – There is something in your life where you have ridiculously inadequate resources. Opportunity to reset the equation.

Through many dangers toils and snares I have already come.His grace has brought me safe this far, and grace will lead me home.The Lord has promised good to me. His word my hope secures.He will my shield and portion be, as long as life endures.

<><><><><>

5.18.2025    Brainerd  (Sunday AM)