NOT A STRAIGHT LINETHESE ARE THE NAMESGENESIS 46:8-47:10

INTRO: If I remember correctly (it’s been a while), one of the bigger days in the high school year was the day you got your yearbook. Maybe social media some of that seems less relevant. But it still makes a statement when all this is pulled together and documented for the year.

Some sections of the yearbook are all about action shots: the game, concert, spirit week, fundraiser, pep rally. Lots going on, who did what, what picture do we have of it. We’ve had action in Genesis as we’ve looked at the life of Joseph which is Not a Straight Line. Think about it.

A blended family that really never blended too well, brothers sell a brother into slavery, convince dad he’s dead, try to move on with their lives for decades. They don’t realize it, but they end up meeting this brother, Joseph again. He’s powerful, they’re in need. But, instead of revenge, Joseph tells them he believes in God’s plan and he shows forgiveness and mercy.

Complicated family dynamics, pain, loss, guilt and shame, rebuilding life, justice, mercy. This isn’t that far from where we live. Last week, there was something else that seems really difficult. I have never done it before, but it must be an enormous amount of pressure to emigrate a family.  When I have gone to foreign countries, I’ve had a passport and a round trip ticket. But a man named Jacob is moving his entire family, permanently to a place that must’ve seemed like a foreign world to him, Egypt.

In Genesis 46, Jacob heads down to Egypt to reunite with Joseph. That is the way the chapter starts. As you get closer to the end of chapter 46.

46:28–30 28Now Jacob had sent Judah ahead of him to Joseph to prepare for his arrival at Goshen. When they came to the land of Goshen, 29Joseph hitched the horses to his chariot and went up to Goshen to meet his father Israel. Joseph presented himself to him, threw his arms around him, and wept for a long time. 30Then Israel said to Joseph, “I’m ready to die now because I have seen your face and you are still alive!”

This has to be one of the most moving scenes in the Bible. Something just resolves in our heart. God works all things together for good. Our heavenly Father knows how to give good gifts to his children. God restores, heals, makes all things new.

I mentioned yearbooks. There’s another prominent section of a yearbook. That is page by page filled with class by class, row by row, picture by picture, name by name. “These are the people” in this class at this point in time.

I find that at the end Genesis, the action slows down, and you sit with individuals for a while. Not as much movement and change, but more conversations. And it starts off with a big crazy family documented, person by person.  Genesis 46:8-27

If you've been at Brainerd long, you realize that lists like these fascinate me. Every word of Scripture is significant. God wants us to have it, exactly as it is. Why are these names here? What is God telling us?

These are the names of the descendants of Jacob – we walk through each child that Jacob had.

Their names bring to mind so many things. This family had its faults, and others suffered because of them. Jacob, wives, Reuben, Simeon and Levi, Judah, all of them, Joseph. So many backstories

But the main backstory is that this family had been completely fractured. It’s weird to see the names together.  BUT, here they are together. It is as if God is reminding us that this is who they are individually, and each member of this family matters to me. But, in chapter 46, they are together.

The number is interesting to me: 70 of them. They get counted in a specific way, especially because you have some people dead in this list, some people yet to be born, some are already in Egypt. I definitely think the number is signaling to us that more is going on.

7x10 = a number of totality – Hebrew number of perfection. The whole family went down. All of them are there. All of them are together.

Just seeing the list communicates this family is finally in a different place. I see a real parallel in the work that God still does.

GOD BRINGS TOGETHER A GROUP OF PEOPLE

This is a group of people who have been all over the place, who don’t deserve God’s grace in their lives, but have been given promises, a people who have experienced grace

The family of Jacob is a family in covenant relationship with God. Each of the members matter individually: we read of their experience of grace. They matter individually, but they are identified together.

Here’s the parallel – There is another group that God brings together, even today. The way Scripture speaks of it is that we are part of a new covenant. But, the dynamic is still much the same “I will be your God and you will be my people (Jeremiah 31:33).” People of this new covenant (US) are called a church (an assembly, a gathering of people that God has brought together).

You enter this covenant through faith in who Jesus is, and what he has done in dying, rising, ascending and ruling. There are no special privileges because of ethnicity or geography. As a matter of fact, our identity as a people is from all nations (Eph 2-3, Rev 7).

1 Peter 2:10 10Once you were not a people, but now you are God’s people; once you had not received mercy, but now you have received mercy.

And God brings us together, even though we have so many differences.

Collectively – The flock of God (every sheep)Collectively – the body of Christ (every part/member)Collectively – The temple of the Holy Spirit (every brick)

So much of our world caters to us individually, that it becomes really critical to remind ourselves that yes Jesus loves me, but he brings me into a spiritual family. You matter individually. But Jesus loves US.

Baptism identifies as part of a people.Partnership with a group of believers identifies (not just a technicality)Gathering identifies you as part of this peopleRelationships identify (praying, caring, serving)Going on mission sent from a people to create more gathered groups

This has always been what God was all about. But let’s be honest.

We could’ve been looking at this all wrong: in our consumer mindset, we think we choose a church. That has some truth. But God is doing something that He’s been doing for a long time: gathering His people together. That’s not always easy, and can be painful.

It’s probably really helpful to remember what GOD has done in bringing us together. What a privilege for us.

God hardwires a reminder for us, in the midst of this emotionally moving story. And, we can’t escape that it means something for us here today. I want us to keep going so we see more in some of these NEXT VERSES as Joseph is moving the family.

Genesis 46:31–47:6 31Joseph said to his brothers and to his father’s family, “I will go up and inform Pharaoh, telling him, ‘My brothers and my father’s family, who were in the land of Canaan, have come to me. 32The men are shepherds; they also raise livestock. They have brought their flocks and herds and all that they have.’ 33When Pharaoh addresses you and asks, ‘What is your occupation?’ 34you are to say, ‘Your servants, both we and our ancestors, have raised livestock from our youth until now.’ Then you will be allowed to settle in the land of Goshen, since all shepherds are detestable to Egyptians.” 1So Joseph went and informed Pharaoh: “My father and my brothers, with their flocks and herds and all that they own, have come from the land of Canaan and are now in the land of Goshen.” 2He took five of his brothers and presented them to Pharaoh. 3And Pharaoh asked his brothers, “What is your occupation?” They said to Pharaoh, “Your servants, both we and our ancestors, are shepherds.” 4And they said to Pharaoh, “We have come to stay in the land for a while because there is no grazing land for your servants’ sheep, since the famine in the land of Canaan has been severe. So now, please let your servants settle in the land of Goshen.” 5Then Pharaoh said to Joseph, “Now that your father and brothers have come to you, 6the land of Egypt is open before you; settle your father and brothers in the best part of the land. They can live in the land of Goshen. If you know of any capable men among them, put them in charge of my livestock.”

Do you see what happens? Joseph is shrewd. “My family isn't going to be a burden. They can settle on their own. As a matter of fact, I've found them land in Goshen. Maybe that could work long term.”

I take a step back and look at the writing, and it makes me take note. So, this issue of where they will live has occupied a few chapters. Why make such a big deal about this? Okay, so they are shepherds, Goshen, etc. I understand that it happened, but this seems to be critical for us to get. Why?

As you appreciate the entire story (big picture, macro-level), you can see that God has a greater design, and this is NO LITTLE DETAIL.

Back up. These brothers, this family had become way too intertwined with the other nations in Canaan. Rather than being distinct, they were taking on the customs of the people. Where God always wants his people distinct, different, they were being absorbed into that world, not changing it.

Now they would be pulled out, and isolated in Egypt. Egyptians didn’t want anything to do with them. This is a key part of the story. So, for the next 400 years, they would grow, AND they would be distinct. They wouldn’t just be a group of 70, they would become a nation with a very distinct identity.

I want you to see another parallel:

God brings people together, AND HE ALSO SETS THEM APART.

Individually they each had their stories, then God in his grace brings them together. And part of his work is making them distinct.

There definitely is a parallel to what God is doing now through the church, but there are significant differences as well.

1 Peter 2:9 9But you are a chosen race, a royal priesthood, a holy nation, a people for his own possession, that you may proclaim the excellencies of him who called you out of darkness into his marvelous light.

That language is so critical. A holy nation. We are ONE, SET APART BY GOD. We are meant to be distinct. God brings people together and sets them apart. We are distinct because we have the Holy Spirit of God, sent to reside in us. He is doing a work of transforming us from the inside

But even as we are distinct, it's not just a list of practices we learn to avoid (we don’t ____, _____, _____). It's really about a relationship we are pursuing as well. God through the Spirit is giving us fellowship with Jesus, and our relationship has set us apart.

But, here’s a critical difference from what we see in the Old Testament: rather than cluster us to live in one spot like we see happening in this story, God has chosen to scatter his church throughout the world, set of outposts, and we represent Jesus. We are making followers of Jesus while we are set apart, but still living in the world. In the world, but not of it.

Here’s the question that brings. Are we set apart? Maybe that’s a question to pursue with another Christian friend, or in a group setting.

By our kindness and love, choices we make, our speechBy our goals, value systems, pursuits. Treating each other

Retirement, raising kids, handling money, showing mercy, look at our time, look at what God has given us.

Set apart, while living in the world. This can flesh itself out in so many ways. In the world, not of it.

Do we let our kids know we’re meant to be different? Do we feel that the worse thing imaginable?

We are people who have been brought together, but also set apart.

We’re seeing what God is doing here, and we’re making parallels with the way God works in lives now. Let’s keep looking.

47:7–10 7Joseph then brought his father Jacob and presented him to Pharaoh, and Jacob blessed Pharaoh. 8Pharaoh said to Jacob, “How many years have you lived?” 9Jacob said to Pharaoh, “My pilgrimage has lasted 130 years. My years have been few and hard, and they have not reached the years of my ancestors during their pilgrimages.” 10So Jacob blessed Pharaoh and departed from Pharaoh’s presence.

The story of Jacob is so interesting to me for so many reasons. But, here it stands out that while Pharaoh is the ruler of this Egyptian kingdom. It is JACOB who blesses HIM. It’s just one more reminder of what God had in mind for this family.

Genesis 12:2 2And I will make of you a great nation, and I will bless you and make your name great, so that you will be a blessing. 3I will bless those who bless you, I will curse anyone who treats you with contempt, and all the peoples on earth will be blessed through you.

It’s happened and is happening.

So, now we can add to our sentence one more time.

God brings people together, but he also sets them apart TO BLESS THOSE AROUND THEM.

I see this working itself out in a couple of ways in this story.

Jacob blessing Pharaoh. Lesser blessing the greater.

Brothers (v6) –Your brothers can be in charge. If they are anything like you (when we meet them, we wouldn’t put them in charge of anything). But, now gathered together, could they serve in a time of need.

Egypt is in a better place.

Does that challenge you? Does it encourage you? The possibilities here almost seem endless to me. When we leave here, we take the Great Commandment seriously.

Teacher that parents want their kid in your class___ School, UTC is a better school because you’re there.Accountant that is honest, so that people rest well, knowing you do rightAdvocate in social work that looks out for vulnerable peopleVolunteer that shows up consistently, helps everything workHard work, care about coworkers (It’s more than about…)Coworker that doesn’t gossipFriend who looks after the vulnerable

It's not about impressing others because we’re better than they are. We are the light of the world. Seasons are going to change, and you may not always feel like a blessing. It might feel like you are grinding out some tough days in some dark places. But you are there to bless.

We recognize that the greatest blessing we can bring is the news of salvation. It’s not about being better than someone else.

CONCLUSION

So, as the action slows down. As we begin to trace names, and discern what God has done. We see he is still at work.

What would look different if you believed church wasn’t a tradition or a consumer choice, but God bringing you together with other people?

What would look different if we lived out our mission as a very distinct people (love, service, sacrifice, humility, ambition, forgiveness)?

What would look different if this week we saw our world as people who aren’t threats, but people whom God could use us to bless?

That changes things, doesn’t it?

Here’s your identity: you are a part of the group of people God has brought together, and we know he has set us apart for his purposes, to be a blessing to those around us.

May it be so, Lord!

<><><><><>

10.05.2025  Brainerd  (Sunday AM)