Progress ReportTHE GOD WHO ORCHESTRATESActs 16-17

INTRODUCTION (TITLE SLIDE)

I recently watched a documentary about John Williams the great composer which really took you deeper into how he orchestrates his music (Jaws, Indiana Jones, Saving Private Ryan, ET, Jurassic Park, Star Wars, Home Alone, and the Olympics)

Timing, togetherness of notes (melodies and harmonies), togetherness of different sounding instruments, pace, volume (quiet, loud), range

Same thread/theme (few notes, pattern of notes), what’s featured, what’s background, high points, time for another movement

I am a reader, and I’ve been reading about a very different kind of orchestration that happened in WW2: Army, Navy, Marines, what’s now the Air Force; civilians, weather, science of weapons, psychology – to try to win WW2 in the Pacific.

As compelling as those have been, there’s another kind of orchestration that has gotten my attention as I read through Acts.

When God orchestrates things, He leaves so many good things behind: new believers (meeting together), encouraged brothers/sisters

God orchestrates Holy Spirit direction, ambition to see the gospel go new places and intentionality ordering life for God’s word to advance, desire for others to experience a life-changing relationship with Jesus, willingness to suffer, seeing people in their pain, external pressure, commitment to speak about Jesus. God orchestrates life perfectly.

I want you to see how God orchestrates some things in Acts 16-17.

I want you to have a heightened sensitivity and even enjoyment when you see God at work. If you see it here, I believe you might notice God orchestrating things with your friends, family, random occurrences, opportunities, favorable/unfavorable conditions, I think it could be settling for you in your own life, give you deeper trust and confidence, maybe even help you take some bolder steps.

So, let’s do that. What does it look like when God orchestrates something?

God orchestrates the where-are-we-going moments

Sometimes, we feel in control, we have a plan, we’re working our plan. Other times, it feels like things are happening nowhere close to our plan. But, even there, God is working. God is bringing things together, timing things perfectly for His purposes.

Acts 16:6-8, then a map.

Acts 16 starts with Paul and Silas in territory they’ve been in; sense a closed door by the Holy Spirit to go to Asia. In that region is Ephesus (actually all the 7 churches in Revelation). God’s Word will be taken there eventually, just not now. Where are we going?

So, they have some ambition to go to Bithynia (another map). The Spirit of Jesus does not allow them. Jesus is still directing. (Spirit of Jesus). Where are we going?

They go to Troas. They’re ready to speak the Word. Message beyond worth. They know what can happen but it seems like events have paused.

Read vs 9-12, then a map

V9 says Paul had a vision, a man from Macedonia (region of Greece). We need help. Conclusion (some sort of conference together) that God wants us to good-news them.  Your will be done. They start moving toward Macedonia and end up in Philippi.

God orchestrates the where-are-we-going moments

Closed doors are really frustrating. Trying to read circumstances. Do we persevere, move on, consider something else? What does God want?

Always have some caution not to overread things like this

The fact that this isn’t recorded happening 10x in the book of Acts likely means we won’t have this every other day. We don’t have to overthink, be paralyzed, get spooky about every little thing.

The fact that this IS recorded as happening helps us appreciate God sometimes closes “logical” doors and opens some “surprising” doors. Again, we don’t have to overthink, be paralyzed, get spooky about every little thing.

A couple of things come to mind

It’s really helpful to have friends who can help us sort through times like these to discern what’s going on.

One other thing: it seems like this would have its best application in missionary settings. The driver here is GOSPEL PREACHING to people who haven’t heard. The foot is on the pedal of gospel advance, not just “how do I make my life more comfortable.”

Where are we going? God orchestrates those moments.

God orchestrates the look-for-and-lean-in moments

Some of this is so deep, but I am firmly convinced that God orchestrates our ambition, our heart to look for people, and lean into what God is doing. The Bible never presents people as robots, but it does present God working on people’s hearts, preparing them for encounters with His grace.

Read 16:13-15

Paul operates with such gospel intentionality. “We expected to find someone.” Paul often began ministry in a town at a synagogue. For a city to have a synagogue, there had to be 10 Jewish men. There are women gathered by a river, outside the city gate.

Something worth noting. Lydia is from Thyatira – Asia (God brought her there).  God had been preparing, orchestrating the events of her life for that moment. And she responds (in Acts that’s shorthand for faith and repentance, submitting to Jesus as the Messiah). How much must God have loved Lydia to direct Paul to her!

She identifies with Jesus through baptism (ripple effects – household). Immediate identification with other Christians (come stay).

God orchestrates these moments when people like Paul are looking for people to hear about Jesus and leaning in. God works in such a way where a household comes to faith.

Paul is sensitive to the one asking religious questions, the one listening. Pieces of the puzzle, not sure how they all connect. God used the heart of Paul. I think we can learn something from that.

Who is down the road, but needs more clarityWhere are we looking, where are we open to finding

Maybe a first step: If I asked you to write a list the people close to you who you just aren’t sure they are a follower of Jesus, that could be a start. What questions are they asking? What matters to them? Where is life working for them? Where is it not?

God prepared Lydia [backstory, the current moment], God had prepared Paul, God was orchestrating a work in Philippi. Let’s keep learning

God orchestrates the someone in need crosses our path moments

God takes the rhythms and decisions of our lives, some intentional, some of them not nearly as thoughtful, and he designs things with those.

Read verses 16-18Have you ever watched old shows and just cringed, because something that is just way out-of-line is presented as really normal and okay. You read this and you realize such a dark practice: Who is making all the money at her expense?

God orchestrates Paul’s annoyance at her persistent words about salvation. Salvation is a big concept in Acts. It will come up again in Philippi. And here, she is speaking about salvation.

Paul casts out the spirit out of her. We don’t track her steps into the future, but at this moment, she will no longer be able to be used by these people for those purposes.

When Paul was wondering why Asia is a closed door, this girl was trapped with no escape. And the traction that Paul got with Lydia, led to a route that passed this girl. Her life changed.

God orchestrates the someone in need crosses our path moments It’s worth highlighting that this is such a normal response for Christians: People shouldn’t be used. When people seem trapped, Christians often step forward in some way to help.

Dr. Pepper – AIDS research   addiction recoveryhuman trafficking             set up clinics/pharmaciesrefugee / resettlement (a lot of Christians teach English)supporting kids (education)   crisis pregnancycounseling / social work

Unofficial, not necessarily professional [take in family members, helping professions]

God often uses these encounters to change us. It’s more than charity. We lean in deeper and deeper.

We see image bearers, people that Jesus loves, hope for more, and I believe God can use all sorts of your intentionality when you see needs and are bold for Jesus. God is orchestrating it all.

But those don’t always go that well. Sometimes it feels like all the good efforts blow up in your face, or don’t help nearly as much as you’d like, or you feel like you may not have as much as you’d like to show for it.

God orchestrates the didn’t-ask-for-this-but-I’ll-still-be-faithful moments

This world’s a broken place. Sometimes the brokenness hits us in the face. God is in charge of that as well. He has his designs. You begin to string a few things together, and you’re blown away at watching the Lord work.

Read verses 19-34

The jailer just seems to be like a guy who’s “just doing his job.” And the Lord intersects his path with Paul/Silas, who are in jail because he gave a young lady freedom. Paul had to experience pain, false accusations, a mob that just gets out of hand. God orchestrates all of that, for this man to be “clocked in at just the right time.” God is a great orchestrator, using his people’s faithfulness.

Earthquake (they would happen in that region): Orchestrates geological anomalies

An entire family/household is changed. Lydia and her household gets us kicked off, this family follows. Philippi won’t be the same.

How much must God love this jailer and his family? Do you see how God orchestrates the didn’t-ask-for-this-but-I’ll-still-be-faithful moments

My mind goes a couple of places: First, do you have a playlist ready for these moments? Some of you are music people.

This response just stirs us! I don’t want to pretend that everyone will sing, stay strong, no questions, no doubts, and that’s the easy, logical response. That would trivialize the bumpy ride you might be on. It’s also in the Bible.

questions – how long, why, do you see what’s going onwrestling – God remove this thorn, if it be possible, let this passrequests – judge the people who’ve done wrong

Still, even when a bigger picture is really hard to discern, I believe that God always gives us a path to faithfulness

So that means

friend situation that stinks right now   career path that’s gotten cloudywork that’s taken a really tough turn   suffering that just heated upmarriage that’s tough, marriage that you’d like that hasn’t materializedkids that are keeping you enough at night

God may surprise you with what He is doing. We still walk through a lot of very difficult things, things we wouldn’t ask for, things that feel really scary. God is orchestrating them.

The response will not be one size fits all, but still there’s faithfulness, going to the Lord – he’s still big, good, wise. God orchestrates the didn’t-ask-for-this-but-I’ll-still-be-faithful moments.

God had been up to so much in Philippi, but it’s also clear that

God orchestrates the time-to-move-on moments

You live very long, and you realize there are seasons. Things change, doors close, you retire, you move, you change jobs, new things open up. I want you to see how God orchestrates that.

Read 16:35-40

God likely uses the government overreach, crossing a line, to give space for this small church to meet. Short term protection, and we do read about God’s people in this place when we read Philippians.

Read 17:1-4 then one more MAP

Another church is established in Thessalonica, then Paul goes to Berea, then Athens. God is coordinating the request to leave to accomplish more. Again, God orchestrates the time-to-move-on moments.

My dad was in the military, so there were moments where Uncle Sam said it’s time to move, time to retire. It was somewhat easy to have clarity on that. Other situations are a lot harder.

It’s not always easy, but it’s often a part of life. But, for Paul, the same ambition is there. Paul will explain, try to convince and persuade people of who Jesus is and what He’s done. In the end: Some of them were persuaded and joined Paul and Silas, including a large number of God-fearing Greeks, as well as a number of the leading women.

God is orchestrating more people coming to know the Lord. Europe is hearing the message of the gospel.

CONCLUSION

Sometimes you’re watching a movie and you think whoever wrote the movie screenplay was just cheating: someone is just in the right place, at just the right time (catch a glance, chase begins); convenient for a plot, but you think NO WAY it goes down like that

For those who are Christians – your life isn’t your own. You belong to God. And he has purposes for you to serve Him beyond anything you can imagine. You were made for relationship and communion with God, eternal destinies being shaped. God is working out His plan for your good and other’s good, and He’s using timing, sequence, circumstances. It’s time to keep walking, keep trusting, keep taking bold steps for him.

For those who have not yet met the Lord – Maybe today is when it has clicked. You realize a lot of your life, maybe even recently has been like Lydia or the jailer.

<><><><><>

2.16.2025    Brainerd  (Sunday AM)