What’s the Point?W H E R E   A R E   W EEcclesiastes 1

Let’s read Ecclesiastes 1.

Ecc. presses a question that’s going to be the title of our series: What’s the point? The way Ecc works really can make your head spin. Sometimes you wonder WHERE AM I?

John 3:16, Prov. 3:5, Matt 28:19-20, Ps 51 they all sound like the Bible

But Ecc. doesn’t really sound like that. It doesn’t just tell a story (draw lessons from), not always easy to outline.

Because it’s so unique, one of the most helpful things for us to get our bearings. So I want to try to plot it out for you. Please stay with me.

It’s really dark. You don’t know exactly where you are, but you can tell you’re in the woods, a park, a forest. You have a flashlight, it doesn’t go super far, and so you can’t really make out any main trails. Mix between things that you can make out, and yet again you’re not exactly sure where to find help. You have to start walking.

Let’s take Ecc, set it in the bigger Bible story which starts with CREATION.

This creation is “very good” (Gen 1:31)The heavens and the earth declare the glory of God – Ps 19Humans are privileged and treasured – Ps 8:5-6

Shortly after creation, we read that Adam/Eve sinned (THE FALL)

Romans 5:12, 14 12Therefore, just as sin entered the world through one man, and death through sin, in this way death spread to all people, because all sinned. 14Nevertheless, death reigned from Adam to Moses, even over those who did not sin in the likeness of Adam’s transgression.

Sin entered, Death Spread, Death reigned. This is the world of Ecc.

Romans 8:20–24 20For the creation was subjected to futility—not willingly, but because of him who subjected it—in the hope 21that the creation itself will also be set free from the bondage to decay into the glorious freedom of God’s children. 22For we know that the whole creation has been groaning together with labor pains until now. 23Not only that, but we ourselves who have the Spirit as the firstfruits—we also groan within ourselves, eagerly waiting for adoption, the redemption of our bodies.

Subjected to futility, bondage/decay, groaning

So, where does Ecc land. Where are you? Ecclesiastes teaches that YOU ARE HERE. A world that is intended to be something that is very good (and in many ways still is) mixed with being very broken.

The world of Ecc. is a REAL world. We need to come to terms with that.

We’re not meant to complain about everything.I also don’t can’t put our head in the sand.Ecclesiastes doesn’t feel like anyone is whining, but someone is generally frustrated over things that are frustrating.

Reading Ecclesiastes gives us the opportunity to NAME some things.

We’re trying to deal with life. In v1, we have a teacher or a preacher. He speaks to an assembled group. helping them through sort things.

So, you try to make sense. The first thing that is named is thatYou really can’t figure this world out or really control it

2“Absolute futility,” says the Teacher. “Absolute futility. Everything is futile.”

38x this word is used, and then 2x (beginning and the end) it doubles

Translation of hevel

CSB – futility, ESV/KJV/NAS – vanity, NIV/NLT – Meaninglessness

Tricky word – Vapor, vanishing, breath, puff of air, fleeting

Very cold day, you exhale, you see your breath, try to grab it, but it doesn’t last

You can’t grasp the wind (chasing/pursuit of the wind – 14, 17). At times it seems like there’s just no point in it all

Things sometimes take our breath away. Things hurt, things are frustrating, things feel pointless, things seem so short.

We name something else: You try to show a profit, get something out of it, have something to show for it, but you end up having a hard time doing this.

3What does a person gain for all his efforts that he labors at under the sun? 4A generation goes and a generation comes, but the earth remains forever. 5The sun rises and the sun sets; panting, it hurries back to the place where it rises. 6Gusting to the south, turning to the north, turning, turning, goes the wind, and the wind returns in its cycles. 7All the streams flow to the sea, yet the sea is never full; to the place where the streams flow, there they flow again.

This could be beautiful (sunrises, Tennessee River, family pictures)

8All things are wearisome, more than anyone can say. The eye is not satisfied by seeing or the ear filled with hearing. 9What has been is what will be, and what has been done is what will be done; there is nothing new under the sun.

You feel stuck by lots of things in life, no good off ramp, this isn’t going to end. It’s hard, grinding you down. He doesn’t sit neutral.

You can also try to leave your mark, leave a legacy, make a difference, but that regularly doesn’t work out.

10Can one say about anything, “Look, this is new”? It has already existed in the ages before us. 11There is no remembrance of those who came before; and of those who will come after there will also be no remembrance by those who follow them.

NAME – big stuff in high school, a year later, 2 years later; 30 years later exec VP in the 80’s

Maybe you’re a more specific activist – Try to see change, right wrongs, correct what is off. But that doesn’t always work, often it can seem like it just stays consistently bad

15What is crooked cannot be straightened; what is lacking cannot be counted.

We could name some things: vulnerable kids, teaching, law enforcement, helping professions, head of a new department. And there seems to be a code in the universe that’s working against you.

But, here’s reality. You have to try to find a way to live. We hear a little more of how all this goes from his perspective.

12I, the Teacher, have been king over Israel in Jerusalem. 13I applied my mind to examine and explore through wisdom all that is done under heaven. God has given people this miserable task to keep them occupied.

So many places in Ecc present a view of God that isn’t 100% wrong if we read it through a certain lens (is he in charge, running the show, ordering steps, giving work to do), but it also is skewed and so incomplete. Is this really the dominant impression we should have?

14I have seen all the things that are done under the sun and have found everything to be futile, a pursuit of the wind.

He pursues more

16I said to myself, “See, I have amassed wisdom far beyond all those who were over Jerusalem before me, and my mind has thoroughly grasped wisdom and knowledge.” 17I applied my mind to know wisdom and knowledge, madness and folly; I learned that this too is a pursuit of the wind. 18For with much wisdom is much sorrow; as knowledge increases, grief increases.

“Work smarter not harder” they tell you. There’s wisdom to be had, and so he employs tactics and extreme strategies with unlimited resources.

His conclusion – Even if wisdom is better than foolishness, it still isn’t fool proof, and you still don’t have a lot to show for it. He sits in sorrow and grief.

Reading Ecc gives us the opportunity to NAME some things.

Some of this really resonates, which means you realize, “Okay, so I am not going crazy, or maybe I am, but I am not alone. So much of the book describes the human condition well

Sometimes, it’s really valuable to see it the way it is.

Not just immediately going to “look on the bright side,” or “others have it a lot worse.” You just need to “get over it.” I am fearful we may short-circuit suffering. Quick to resolve.

Feel the pain, wrestle with the questions.

Even the God questions. Talks about God A LOT in the middle of the hard stuff (not just prosperity). At some point in your life, you’ll need to wrestle.

But, for all that resonates in Ecc, it also leaves you hungry, it pushes you, pokes you, goads you (12:11) – Cattle prods, keep moving

Words can be sharp, cut, convict (ouch). We may know that’s true but why did you have to say it?

Ecc won’t let you change the subject, numb, escape, hop on a mindless iPhone game and play for another hour. What’s the point and what are we going to do?

ASK YOU TO DO SOMETHING: You have a frame for where life is. Could you mentally compile some things that are frustrating and dig a little deeper into what it is that hurts, what doesn’t seem right? It could be so helpful to bring a friend into that mix to help you.

For as helpful as naming is, it isn’t enough. It isn’t complete. Throughout our weeks in Ecc, I want you to see that

Reading Ecclesiastes causes us to recognize we NEED some things.

Here’s where we are: I am guessing that while much of Ecc will resonate, it’s wise to go to a few other places in Scripture for things to resolve.

Ecc brings problems, but not solutions – doesn’t really tell us what to do, or even how to think/process, points out contradictions

The world of Ecclesiastes is an INCOMPLETE world. We need a personal God, we need victory, change, reversal of this world as it is. We need hope, and we need something that is permanent, something that will last.

It may be the most helpful thing to finish the diagram. Covenants

After the Fall in the Bible, there come several covenants (Ab/Is/Jac, Sin, David). These Covts are binding Agreements God makes with His people. He gives his name YHWH (we don’t get that name in Ecc.)

Through covenants, God works, God sets out terms for a relationship, God gives directions, God comes closer.

Because it’s a broken world, these covenants fall short (not God’s fault). God promises a new covenant, and when Jesus comes he initiates that new covenant, that new binding agreement. CROSS/CROWN

When Jesus came, things changed.

He brought life, healing, joy, freedom. So many things will never be the same. At the same time, the world is still broken – he experiences pain, turmoil, weariness, death, mocking, foolishness

At 33 years old his life, just like a vapor, his life is gone.

But unlike anything that had happened before, he himself defeated death, rose again in power and victory. He is the king. He brings in a new kingdom, and promises complete fulfillment one day

We need to modify our drawing. The Bible presents a day coming. It’s a day of judgment, which is the ending of everything that has messed up creation. They are judged, banished. There is a line in the future.

What remains on the other side  are new heavens and a new earth. No more hevel, tears, death, disease, wars, foolishness, weariness, pain. It will all permanently end. Jesus brought a taste, but one day it will be complete and permanent.

So we need to change where we see ourselves located.

Ecclesiastes says YOU ARE HERE. A broken world that seems to go on and on without a lot of firm hope.

But, if you are in Jesus (relying on Him), it’s actually more accurate to say YOU ARE HERE. You live in light of the cross and resurrection of Jesus, you live with hope of the new heavens and new earth.

Which means you have resources that Ecc doesn’t draw on. We’re going to have to remember that as we walk through the book. Appreciate how God and His good news fill out the bleak picture

In some ways, it doesn’t change a lot of what we just named. We need to do the hard work of naming things. But, it also significantly changes everything we just talked about.

We NEED some things. When we feel the world is broken, we can go some places, and we NEED to.

Often Ecclesiastes feels like we live in a very lonely world. We have a God who has entered into covenant with us.

Difference between Senior Master Seargent Hill and DadAbba, we pray “Our Father”

We sometimes feel like an impersonal universe has stacked the deck against us, but we have a Father who deeply cares/has compassion

We deal with Hevel having a Father who sees, knows, who loves. We must draw upon that.

We sometimes feel like we’re the only ones who are feeling the brokenness, but we walk forward with Jesus who endured hevel for us. God the Son who identified with us [full brunt of hevel as He died].

We rest in our union with Him and draw close to Him.

We sometimes feel it will all stay messed up. Jesus was/is victorious for us. He launched a new kingdom and rose victoriously

We have hope. Passages like Rom 5 look very different

15But the gift is not like the trespass. For if by the one man’s trespass the many died, how much more have the grace of God and the gift which comes through the grace of the one man Jesus Christ overflowed to the many. 17If by the one man’s trespass, death reigned through that one man, how much more will those who receive the overflow of grace and the gift of righteousness reign in life through the one man, Jesus Christ.

Old things pass away, everything becomes new.

We have a hard time, navigating things, but the Spirit provides real-time help to us, personal help, companion; transforming/producing fruit in us [endurance, patience, self-control]

We cry out, and lean in: Romans 8 reversed.

20For the creation was subjected to futility—not willingly, but because of him who subjected it—in the hope  21that the creation itself will also be set free from the bondage to decay into the glorious freedom of God’s children. 23Not only that, but we ourselves who have the Spirit as the firstfruits—we also groan within ourselves, eagerly waiting for adoption, the redemption of our bodies.  24Now in this hope we were saved.

He wastes nothing. He is conforming us to the image

We wonder if anything is permanent, and we realize our God has promised to make all things permanently new for us.

We don’t just settle. We groan in hope. We know what we’re waiting for is very real, very permanent

CONCLUSION

I really thought that some background to Ecc would help, but I also know sometimes it’s hard to know what to take away from our time

For some of you this is a “tuck-it-away” sort of message. Life is really good, you don’t necessarily feel all the brokenness. Can you name the things that seem to be vanishing, the things that seem to be futile? Can you think deeply how this very good world is broken in some places. Your own experience. Ecc is an invitation to bring it out into the open.

God gave us each other.

When you have clarity on that, can you let it propel you to some deep hope. And for that God gave us each other.

<><><><><>

2.23.2025    Brainerd  (Sunday AM)