BOOKMARKREPENTANCEPsalm 51

If someone asked you to define repentance, how do you think you’d do it? What does it look like? How do you know you’ve done it?

I’ll be more direct, if you will let me: have you done it? Have you repented?  How often? What role does repentance play in your life?

Sometimes it’s helpful to have a visual: What did repentance look like for you last week?

You felt bad about something you said, thought, felt, did, wanted. Something didn’t go well, you hurt people à how often did that result in repentance?

Every day? Once, twice. Is repentance mostly for the big things: the sign that says REPENT OR DIE – “I hope I’ve done that.” Long time ago?

A hard truth is: we don’t think about repentance enough, talk about it enough, do it enough (especially when I hear these Scriptures)

Isaiah 55:7 – Let the wicked one abandon his way and the sinful one his thoughts; let him return to the Lord

Ezekiel 18:30-31 – 30“Repent and turn from all your rebellious acts. 31Throw off all the transgressions you have committed, and get yourselves a new heart and a new spirit. Repent and live!

John the Baptist in Matt. 3:8 Produce fruit consistent with repentance.

Jesus in Luke 13:3 Unless you repent, you will all perish as well.

Peter in Acts 3:19 Repent, turn back, so that your sins may be wiped out,

James in 4 – Draw near to God, and he will draw near to you. Cleanse your hands, sinners, and purify your hearts, you double-minded. Humble yourselves before the Lord, and he will exalt you.

I believe Martin Luther got it right 500 years ago. “When our Lord and Master Jesus Christ, said, ‘Repent’, he willed that the whole of life of believers should be one of repentance.”

If you’re thinking you are about to get beat up today by a harsh pastor, I really do have good news of a better agenda.

Paul in Romans 2:4 God’s kindness is intended to lead you to repentance

What if you got glimpses of God’s kindness today, and in light of that you had a better vision for what repentance looks like. You see what God has in store for us when we repent, I have to think this week looks considerably different and better than last week.

I will try to simplify, give you three words, and help you see a flow with the goal of all of us repenting more.

We normally work through a book of the Bible. But occasionally we take a Sunday and lock in a mental, spiritual, even physical bookmark (SERIES SLIDE). Today we’re going to Bookmark Psalm 51.You need to see this for yourself in the Bible and know it’s not just Curtis making some stuff up.

1Be gracious to me, God, according to your faithful love; according to your abundant compassion, blot out my rebellion. 2Completely wash away my guilt and cleanse me from my sin.

My rebellion = willful, responsible refusal of God’s way (we come to the realization…I’ve done that)

MY guilt/iniquity = the ‘twist’ in human nature where sin comes from (realization…I’ve done that)

MY sin – here is where I missed the mark. self-conscious realization; awareness of the presence of sin

3For I am conscious of my rebellion, and my sin is always before me.4Against you—you alone—I have sinned and done this evil in your sight. So you are right when you pass sentence; you are blameless when you judge.

personal dimensions, personal violation; another word added – evil

5Indeed, I was guilty when I was born; sinful when my mother conceived me. 6Surely you desire integrity in the inner self, you teach me wisdom deep within.

how deep the problem goes

you desire integrity/ teach wisdom – I’m not there; I’ve been foolish

8Let me hear joy and gladness; let the bones you have crushed rejoice.

Some physical dimensions to this. David as a person has suffered internally, and is coming clean.

What you have as one of the first aspects of repentance is a

REALIZATION (realistic recognition)

There is a realization. In that, do you hear the word “reality”? We can live a while in self-deception. We do. But because God is so kind, at times we have moments of realistic recognition.

We experience consequences to our foolishness and they hurt. Our conscience fires and says “that’s not okay.” The Spirit works in us convicting and giving clarity. We read God’s Word, hear it taught, it has our attention. A friend/relative speaks truth in love. God is kind.

Something (counterintuitive) you should know is the closer you grow to the Lord, the more mature relationship with Jesus, the more you see your sin clearly, the more realistic recognitions you will be having.

Please don’t get me wrong. It doesn’t do anyone any good for you to wallow in feeling like a loser, who is just one giant mess up, getting down on yourself. I am not calling you to that.

But, surely life brings a realization:

Gossip or greed, entitlement or envy, deceiving, misleading

Wallow in self-pity or give in sexual sin, dishonoring authority

Callous toward our neighbor, selfishness, pride, favoritism

careless or cutting speech, lingering anger or controlling anxiety that turned your heart away from the Lord

Is that realization ever on your radar? Often. Does it sting?

But, let’s think about what happens when we have this realization! Too often, if you asked what comes next, I would have to say “not much.” Life happens, the day moves on. Maybe I pray later, maybe the bad feelings grow, maybe they operate as a low-grade guilt fever.That can’t be good for my soul.  Where should this realization take us?

There’s a TURN. I almost labeled it a reset, but I felt like it would be easy to approach this too mechanically, something is meant to happen between you and the Lord, and I noticed something in Psalm 51. There are a bunch of requests. You ask someone for something, because you can’t do it for yourself. I can’t provide this for myself, so I am taking things to God

What we know about God – grace, faithful love, compassion – This is the nature of God 101! How awesome that the starting point of the chapter is David knowing that God is a God of

‘grace’, the unmerited, undeserved goodness of God‘faithful love’ – decision by the unchangeable will of God to love‘compassion’, emotional, passionate love

When we know God in that way, we ask these kinds of things. How sweet it is that we can say things like…

1Be gracious to me, God, according to your faithful love; according to your abundant compassion, blot out my rebellion

blot out – ‘wipe away’ sin leaves a deep mark God sees and erases

2Completely wash away my guilt and cleanse me from my sin.

Laundry stain – sin gets right down into the fibers of our nature—God alone reaches and cleanse

Cleanse (used in Leviticus ) purifying from something that excluded them from the congregation of God’s people, (separates from God).

4Against you—you alone—I have sinned and done this evil in your sight. So you are right when you pass sentence; you are blameless when you judge.

recognition of justice, no presumption

7Purify me with hyssop, and I will be clean; wash me, and I will be whiter than snow. 8Let me hear joy and gladness; let the bones you have crushed rejoice. 9Turn your face away from my sins and blot out all my guilt. 10God, create a clean heart for me and renew a steadfast spirit within me. 11Do not banish me from your presence or take your Holy Spirit from me. 12Restore the joy of your salvation to me, and sustain me by giving me a willing spirit.

Do you hear the REQUEST(S)

ALL these requests! This is our vocabulary for repentance. An opportunity to meditate. The meditation will take you to some good places.

Things get named here – there is confession/admission. Dirty, stained, guilty, isolated, exposed, I’ve been foolish. These are honest requests (Have mercy, forgive, blot out, make me clean, restore, renew, help me).

Emotional/feeling – grief (Sometimes this is intense, but not always)Verbal dimension – using our words (Lord, please do something about this for me.)

What’s my biggest fear here? This is such good news, but my fear is that you could get to this place, know you need a U-turn and you could make  some acknowledgment of messing up, and settle for a counterfeit!

2 Corinthians 7:10 – For godly grief produces a repentance that leads to salvation without regret, but worldly grief produces death.

I don’t want you to get scammed where you settle for less than God’s full work in you. I wonder if that happens to us way too much…

I regret my actions. I’ve disappointed myself.I actually am mad at myself. I feel awful. I made a really stupid mistake.I didn’t live up to my own standards.This is not who I am, or my family and friends have known me to be over the years.

There are no requests there. It’s like they “present” as repentance, but it’s not real. Is that where your repentance stops? Yes, you can say, “my bad,” but it doesn’t mirror Ps 51. There’s still a measure of control or pride, and there isn’t a sense of needing God’s mercy (I’ve sinned against you). You settle for a counterfeit turn.

It’s probably helpful to keep pressing on. The turn is not just away from some bad stuff and toward some better stuff.

RELATIONSHIP w/God – The turn is a relationship turn.

We’ve made a turn, we’ve made requests, we’ve found ourselves seeking forgiveness, but there is something else, pursuing the relationship that matters the most. It’s always primarily about that for a Christian!

There was a move away, a drift, a wrong turn from God. And we realize it. We’ve cried out to God for mercy. But we want more. We want Him. We want him to change us. To make us new.

Ps 51 is just consumed with relationship. Don’t just do something for me. Come to me. Let me come to you.  [4 – I’ve sinned against you]

3 verses in a row talk about “spirit.” We’re going inside.

10God, create a clean heart for me and renew a steadfast spirit within me. 11Do not banish me from your presence or take your Holy Spirit from me. 12Restore the joy of your salvation to me, and sustain me by giving me a willing spirit.

With the benefit of being this side of the Spirit entering the lives of believers because of what Jesus has done, it seems even sweeter. I want my spirit to be with YOU. I want your Spirit to be with me. That turn toward a fresh relationship with God means lots of things look different.

The New Testament word for repentance means changing one's mind so that one's views, values, goals, and ways are changed and one's whole life is lived differently. The change is radical, both inwardly and outwardly; mind and judgment, will and affections, behavior and lifestyle, motives and purposes, are all involved. Repenting means starting to live a new life. [Concise Theology, J.I. Packer, 162]

Something different is produced – bear fruit in keeping with repentance)

Movement toward God in his purposes (I want to live for those)

13Then I will teach the rebellious your ways, and sinners will return to you.

Movement toward God in praise

14Save me from the guilt of bloodshed, God— God of my salvation— and my tongue will sing of your righteousness. 15Lord, open my lips, and my mouth will declare your praise.

Movement toward God in the sacrifices he really desires (reading of what he really wants, what he’s really pleased with, what comes first)

16You do not want a sacrifice, or I would give it; you are not pleased with a burnt offering.

sacrifice = peace/fellowship offering (we’re okay, we’re on relational firm ground) – God has come to us. We live with God.

burnt offering = fully consecration to God – we are offering ourselves up to God. We live for God

17The sacrifice pleasing to God is a broken spirit. You will not despise a broken and humbled heart, God.

Turning to God; in Psalm 51 we have words, but this side of the cross, we have a person and a story of God doing for us what we couldn’t do for ourselves. Jesus is the sacrifice. The lamb killed to take away our sin. The lamb who was slain to bring us to God. Repentance brings us to Jesus!

Why would you settle for COUNTERFEITS? – On the relationship side

I had this hiccup, but I want to move past this, and get on with the things that matter most to me.

I’ve made a promise to myself that I will never be in this place again.I am determined to come back from this, even stronger.

How is that even appealing to us, when a turn to Jesus is so much better?

2 Corinthians 7:10 – For godly grief produces a repentance that leads to salvation without regret.

CONCLUSION

Here’s where we need to land today: not with an academic lecture, but with a wholehearted turn to God.

Person who has not yet met Jesus: this could be one of the sweetest days, because you’ve heard of the grace of Jesus to welcome repenters. I love how Jesus in his wisdom gave us some tangible things

Baptism – beginning of faith (picturing repentance)

Recognition that leads to a request (save) that brings a relationship that moves us from death to life. For several of you, that’s your next move. You’ve turned to him, and this is the signal to others.

for the Christian, two images have stuck with me this week, …

Repentance is like weeding the garden of my soul.Repentance is clearing out spiritual plumbing of my heart (blockages)

In the gospels regularly repentance ends in a feast (prodigal Son). Repentance even has a corporate dimension to it. What would it look like for an entire church family, those who identify with Jesus, coming come around a table, we’ve turned from our sin, and we turn TO Him in Communion.

<><><><><>

8.3.2025  Brainerd  (Sunday AM)