What’s the Point?WRAPPING IT UPEcclesiastes 12

If you’ve flown much, you know there are very different types of plane landings. (1) smooth, gliding down. (2) For a variety of reasons, abrupt, slams down, Gets pretty bumpy

I really prefer smooth landings, even in real life. We’ve been so conditioned to expect almost everything to end “and they all lived happily ever after.” Ecclesiastes doesn’t. And we’re not surprised.

Look at some verses here Ecclesiastes 12

1So remember your Creator in the days of your youth: Before the days of adversity come, and the years approach when you will say, “I have no delight in them”…7and the dust returns to the earth as it once was, and the spirit returns to God who gave it. 8“Absolute futility,” says the Teacher. “Everything is futile.”

The Ecc plane lands like it took off (absolute futility in chap 1:2). This is the view of life “under the sun”

As good as things are under the sun, things still don’t last, no happily ever after. They slip away. You can’t hold on to it. There’s something futile about it, and just really frustrating.

Bang, the plane comes down.

And yet, Ecclesiastes isn’t quite done. The Holy Spirit inspired more for us to see, process, take away, learn from. Almost like a second ending

Zoom out really quickly, and it’s more like…”all the words you just read, here’s what was happening.”

9In addition to the Teacher being a wise man, he constantly taught the people knowledge; he weighed, explored, and arranged many proverbs.

The writer of Ecc is the Teacher. There’s careful organization (to Proverbs and Ecc); not haphazard. Thinking, sitting in these awhile; Searching things out; Arranging, organizing

10The Teacher sought to find delightful sayings and write words of truth accurately.

Trying to bring a smile (delight), but never at the expense of truth under the sun. Cracks of light break through, but it’s a room with blackout curtains. We should enjoy life, but it’s tough. It is what it is.

11The sayings of the wise are like cattle prods, and those from masters of collections are like firmly embedded nails. The sayings are given by one Shepherd.

Prods and nails under the sun. Poke in all the right places. All the important matters (not the fluffy ones) are really nailed down.

Shepherd imagery in the Bible is powerful: Ps 23, John 10

12But beyond these, my son, be warned: there is no end to the making of many books, and much study wearies the body.

One more word: don’t waste your time, don’t kid yourself thinking there’s this one new thing, quest that will solve the world’s mysteries

Always a new self-help best seller at BNAnother podcast episode by a life-hack guruSeries on Netflix that will expose everythingCelebrity on the Today/Tonight Show with another joke, laughTikTok or YouTube influencer that has the secret (another video pushed to the top of your feed)

Under the sun, you can keep looking – Ecc lands in the same spot: futility

We may not get a traditional fairy-tale ending, but we do get something really valuable as we navigate life under the sun. He points us to something personal: a personal relationship with God (relationship talk has been present, but a little hidden. Certainly NOT in the foreground, but in the background). Now right here at the end, it takes center stage.

13When all has been heard, the conclusion of the matter is this: fear God and keep his commands, because this is for all humanity. 14For God will bring every act to judgment, including every hidden thing, whether good or evil.

That sheds a lot of light on Ecc. Strong statement. At the end of all talking, this is the conclusion, this is the takeaway.

You might be thinking. “Fun! Three subjects which seem to be everyone’s favorite: FEAR, OBEDIENCE and JUDGMENT

If you read those and blink a bit at them or even think you’re a little triggered, can you hang in there with me for a few moments?

The whole conclusion is RELATIONSHIP, ACTIONS (based on that relationship), and ACCOUNTABILITY (which is based on those actions which are based on that relationship)

Let’s talk about RELATIONSHIP – that’s behind the words “fear God”

You can hear “fear” in a couple of ways; fear that drives away

In your weird dream, the Zombies jump out, relentlessly chase you, track you down and wreck everything – there’s fear

Fear of the maniac strict teacher who gets frustrated at their students for every little thing; for no reason, hate your guts, makes up rules as they go, relishes doling out the punishment, public shame, and trying to nitpick your life to suck every ounce of joy out of it – there’s fear

There is a type of fear that SCREAMS, “Keep your distance. Don’t even think about coming close.”

Fear of the Lord in the Bible (which is a regular topic) is positioned so differently…We’re told to fear God (or we hear “fear of the Lord”)

There is fear that comes b/c someone is undeniably in charge. He has unlimited power. Is that fright, maybe? Is that awe, YES!

There is fear that comes b/c someone is absolutely perfect – their character is so strong, no flaws, almost creates an intimidation

There is more…(and we’re still in awe)

There is fear that comes b/c someone is deeply and permanently, personally committed to us, not just out of duty (doing my job, I signed up for it) – parent, friend, spouse – there’s not 1 thing they wouldn’t do for me (in awe, humbled). it’s in the neighborhood of what we’re talking about

There is fear that comes b/c someone is holding us out of danger (committed love in action – when they actually do it) – so committed to our well-being – MI seen where a fellow operative has gripped your arm, and will not let go

How do you view the one who is all those things perfectly – That’s fear, devotion, trust, submission, worship.

We’re talking about a relationship where Almighty God has a track record of loving people (nation of Israel) despite so many of their efforts at self-destruction.

That’s why it’s really troubling, when He’s dismissed, or treated as unimportant (yeah, but what really matters is that she likes me, or that I get the corner office and stock options, or that the performance review is nailed, or that I get my way, REALLY). What are we doing?

So, the conclusion starts with a relationship (of fear), and

ACTIONS flow out of that RELATIONSHIP

“Keep his commands”, do what He says; Not just a random moral code; a person has spoken

“keep = obey, yes; observe…these have a place in your life; keep wedding vows, more than you obey them. Relationship that drives actions. Rather than: the law clearly says this is a 25mph zone. Do you understand the difference?

If that sounds strange to you…

Deuteronomy 10:12–15 – 12“And now, Israel, what does the Lord your God ask of you except to fear the Lord your God by walking in all his ways, to love him, and to worship the Lord your God with all your heart and all your soul? 13Keep the Lord’s commands and statutes I am giving you today, for your own good. 14The heavens, indeed the highest heavens, belong to the Lord your God, as does the earth and everything in it. 15Yet the Lord had his heart set on your ancestors and loved them. He chose their descendants after them—he chose you out of all the peoples, as it is today.  [Old covenant broke down]

Jeremiah 32:39 – I will give them integrity of heart and action so that they will fear me always, for their good and for the good of their descendants after them. [generational impact]

John 14:15 – “If you love me, you will keep my commands.

ACTIONS are attached to a relationship. God isn’t looking for just a bunch of words. Ecc 5 – in the presence of God, the goal isn’t a bunch of words, or busy religious acts; that’s not overly impressive.

So, there are actions…It will take a long time for this to work itself out. You are on a long walk with the Lord. You’re going to search things out in God’s word, see new things. The Lord will sort things out in your life, I promise. But, your responsibility, my responsibility, is to guard our heart’s reaction time to the Spirit working (Olympic swimming)

So, we owe absolute allegiance to God. We fear Him, we do what he says, and it’s good. [how different that is if Jim in Portland. Some person in Rio, Shanghai, Nairobi or Amsterdam]. But, our God is…

Never wrong, adjusting to new information, or getting with the times

Never working in such a way that is at our or someone else’s expense turning out to be ultimately harmful to us or others

Never unwise – just a little more planning, thoughtfulness, perspective would’ve saved everyone a big hassle

Never can be accused as chasing the wind, futile, a waste, all of it

Are you living in such a way where you say, “no thanks, I will just be independent, self-guided,” as if only YOU know what’s best for you. REALLY? Time to re-read Ecc, and the self-guided, Life as a DIY project. Where does that get you?

There’s something lingering here.

13When all has been heard, the conclusion of the matter is this: fear God and keep his commands, because this is for all humanity. 14For God will bring every act to judgment, including every hidden thing, whether good or evil.

Translations differ here (whole duty of man). 2 words (MAN + ALL). This is what it’s all about. This is the bottom line.

I’ve heard every single thing; here’s the bottom line for every single human; every single action is going to be judged; including every single hidden thing. Everything judged…

Now you have the ACCOUNTABILITY FOR IT ALL

Most of us have played out a good/bad scenario with our actions in the end (a lot of things stack up in our favor): some secret good things, but then there are more secret bad things than we care to admit– you did that, you thought that, things go on in our heart that are no good.

And then there’s the defective side of our relationship with God – not because he’s nitpicky or a petty tyrant. It’s on us. We ignore God or keep him at a distance. We live our own lives. We don’t thank him as we should for providing for us. We don’t honor and obey. We follow our own desires and priorities, and live by the values we decide are best (conveniently mix and match).

We’re held accountable for all of it. I guess if you’ve taken the path of “My relationship with God just isn’t that important,” your strategy is just to take your chances w/the accountability. It seems so shortsighted.

Another path: You recognize that God is just, and can’t/won’t overlook evil.

He cares enough to take our rebellion seriously. He holds us accountable for our actions, our secret thoughts because it matters to him that we dishonor him, that we treat other people so poorly, and that we ruin his world.

In other words, God won’t let the rebellion go on forever. There are consequences: death (Ecc theme). This is part of God’s punishment for humanity’s rejection of him.

But there is a further accounting that we will face. One day we’ll all stand before God and give account to him for our lives, the damage we have done, our personal rejection of him.

The sentence God will pass on that day will be to give us what we have asked for—which is separation from him, cut off from God permanently. And since God is the source of good things, being cut off from him means a destruction that never ends. On our own, that’s where we land.

What is amazing is that Jesus enters the scene. He took upon himself the judgment that we deserved. He died our death for us. All this is completely undeserved by us. We rejected God, because of his great love, God sent his Son to die for us.

God accepted Jesus’ death as payment in full for our sins, and raised him from the dead. Jesus defeated futility/death, and rose up to be what humanity was always meant to be: the ruler of God’s world.

As God’s ruler, Jesus has also been appointed as God’s judge of the world. When Jesus returns and the judgment day comes, Jesus will be the one calling us to account for our rebellion against God. And that could be terrifying to you, but it doesn’t have to be if you’ve trusted.

So, I don’t know how you hear “judgment” for EVERY single thing, but the one we fear who initiated a relationship with us. And this one we obey because he will only do us good, this same God is committed to all of those who are trusting in Jesus hearing something as we stand before God and there’s an accounting.

On the day of judgment  – Because of Jesus “No condemnation”

record cleared, set aside, blotted out, remembered no more, no basisAtoned, covered, justified, vindicated because of Jesus. What a gift!

On the day of judgment – Because of the work of the Spirit “Well done, good and faithful servant”

God gives you a new heart, sends his Spirit to live in you, new motivations, new secret thoughts/actions, new fruit. Things are new. There’s love for others (patient, bear with them). There is love for God (endurance, sacrifice). You become exactly who you are designed to be.

CONCLUSION: We come in for the landing. I am pretty positive with Ecc that it’ll never be neat, tidy, stress-free. But, we’ve landed in the right place.

We’ve recognized the bottom line is this relationship we can have with God, and that relationship drives all kinds of actions, and when we stand before our holy God

Our sinful soul will be counted free for God the just is satisfied to look on Him and pardon me.

He rescues us from our failing. He offers His only Son! He invites us to call Him Father!

<><><><><>

3.30.2025    Brainerd  (Sunday AM)