CHRIST WAS BORN FOR THISJESUS THE WORDJOHN 1:1-18

INTRO: How many of you love (or used to love) a good road trip? Think with me here. Do you know how there are exits (on an interstate)?

Some exits there was only 1 thing off the exit (or even less); look super sketchy, and not worth bothering.

But, other exits there are multiple gas stations, restaurants, even more. You could stay there for a while, but you do have to keep moving.

For us, these weeks leading up to Christmas is maybe a little like being on a road trip —> Christ was born for THIS [Series].

What is the THIS that Christ was born for. The passages we’ve stopped at have WAY more than we could possible take in. So we’re zeroing in a few things – filling out a picture of who Jesus is and what he came for.

Our first stop was Hebrews 1 – the coming of Jesus meets us at some crucial places in our lives

We don’t know exactly what God is like, until Jesus comes, revealsWe don’t hold the world together, but Jesus doesWe can’t make (or keep) ourselves pure/clean, but Jesus permanently makes us cleanWe aren’t in charge of everything, but he rules the worldChrist was born for this.

Our stop last week was in Philippians 2 – Jesus never exploits his status. But Jesus empties himself as a servant. This gives individual Christians, but actually a whole church, Christ was born to give us our marching orders: adopt the same attitude that Jesus had.

This week, we’re making a stop in John 1.  John 1:1-14

These are some of the most powerful things written about Jesus, and there is WAY too much to share on just one Sunday. But let’s notice a few things together. Let’s notice

The titles, the descriptions that help clarify who Jesus is

Each one of these help us understand him more, lead us to deeper heartfelt worship because He’s the center of our lives.

John starts off by saying that Jesus is the “WORD”

The story of Jesus isn’t “once upon a time, there was a boy, there was another planet, there was a beautiful palace/castle. NO, “In the beginning was the WORD.” Meaning a person. Meaning a person who communicates.

God has always been interested in speaking. The Bible regularly says, “and God said,” or “this is the word of the Lord,” or “the Lord declares.”

The Word (in the beginning), with God (differentiating 2 persons), was God (same in his essence).

According to v14, the revelation of God (the Word) is here! In the flesh! The Word that God has to say to the world has arrived in human form.

Maybe you think, “I am not sure I put all that completely together.” You’re in the company with everyone who has ever lived.

He is the Word, but despite that, the truth is we don’t always listen and sometimes we don’t even want to hear from God. Still, what does it mean that God speaks to the world! That’s good news for us.

All things were created through him (3). Jesus is CREATOR (the maker of every single thing). Again, the one who is the agent behind light, sun, fishes, birds, land/sea, is in the flesh. Having conversations. Smiling, eating, drinking, fishing, talking, walking, embracing, loving.

In Him was LIFE (v4). Jesus is the source of all life, activity, energy. It traces to Him. He is now here in the flesh. No wonder he dealt with death so often, no wonder he restored life. No wonder we care about euthanasia and abortion. God is the author of life.

That life was LIGHT of human beings (v4). Jesus is the source of all light and illumination. The world is a dark place. You name an area (sports, entertainment, politics, university life), give us about 3 seconds and we all can find darkness attached.

Jesus comes, and people found his words, his presence, his guidance illuminating. The darkness couldn’t and won’t ever overcome him. Jesus prevails there.

We’re not even doing a deep dive, and you still can appreciate the Word, Creator, Life, Light – always existing that way, then coming in flesh.

A tragedy – Jesus came into this world. The world didn’t recognize Him (10), didn’t receive Him (11), but some did (12). Some believed, in His name, all that he claimed to be, all that he stands for. Have you?

Found this to be so compelling, so true, so crucial; You are not prone to live in fantasy land, or be brainwashed.

It has become clear that you can’t chalk everything up to random atoms, processes. Labs are wonderful, and science is necessary, but some things like the power of God working in you just can’t be explained by a theory of molecules and genes. God’s word puts it together. God has made you come alive to all of it. It’s not a leap in the dark. It’s real and it’s true.

John 1 builds and builds, and you get to verse 14. All these descriptors, and you notice something else

The Word became flesh and dwelt among us. We observed his glory, the glory as the one and only Son from the Father, full of grace and truth.

Those who study John deeply and write about it see John making a really important connection guided by the Holy Spirit.  When you read “full of grace and truth,” not too many trains that carry more freight than that phrase does. Grace/Truth is a heavyweight phrase in the Bible.

When Jesus is described as “full of grace/truth” these are the basics of the character of God. These are ABC’s, 1-2-3, or Subject-Verb-Complement. We have grace and truth.

Hold your place in John 1, but also we can see this kind of description starts in Exodus. Really the same thought expanded (a few more words). We don’t have time to dig deeply into the context, but Moses has asked God to see his glory. The Lord doesn’t show Moses his full glory, but he does let his glory “pass by” Moses, and when God passes by, this is what Moses hears. This is how the Lord describes himself.

Exodus 34:6-7 – The Lord passed in front of him and proclaimed: The Lord—the Lord is a compassionate and gracious God, slow to anger and abounding in faithful love and truth, maintaining faithful love to a thousand generations, forgiving iniquity, rebellion, and sin. But he will not leave the guilty unpunished, bringing the consequences of the fathers’ iniquity on the children and grandchildren to the third and fourth generation.

When someone who you really can trust describes themselves to you, you really want to listen, pay attention. Of course we could add other words, but these five fundamental perfections work themselves out in ways where people are forgiven, and justice is served. God is kind and righteous. Good and sovereign.

(1) compassionate, (2) gracious, (3) slow to anger, (4) abounding in faithful love, (5) abounding in truth.

This is who he is. What you find in the rest of the Old Testament is that a version of these 5 show up so many times (often compressed, not in the same order.). That’s the terminology (riffs like jazz).

Numbers 14:18 – The Lord is slow to anger and abounding in faithful love, forgiving iniquity and rebellion. But he will not leave the guilty unpunished, bringing the consequences of the fathers’ iniquity on the children to the third and fourth generation.

Nehemiah 9:17,31 – But you are a forgiving God, gracious and compassionate, slow to anger and abounding in faithful love….In your abundant compassion, you did not destroy them or abandon them, for you are a gracious and compassionate God.

Psalm 145:8 – The Lord is gracious and compassionate, slow to anger and great in faithful love.

Lamentations 3:32 – Even if he causes suffering, he will show compassion according to the abundance of his faithful love.

Joel 2:13 Tear your hearts, not just your clothes, and return to the Lord your God. For he is gracious and compassionate, slow to anger, abounding in faithful love, and he relents from sending disaster.

Jonah 4:2 – I knew that you are a gracious and compassionate God, slow to anger, abounding in faithful love, and one who relents from sending disaster.

There are over 20 more of these. They aren’t exactly hidden like Easter eggs. It’s worth noting them, highlighting them, underlining.

This is the message in the OT. The people of God heard some form of this all the time. What they heard – The voice was clear, powerful, so good! His words were words of grace and truth.  What does it mean that now Jesus is described in essentially the same way? HE IS THE LORD! This is what Thomas comes to believe at the end of John.

But, for all of that, when it came to SIGHT, Moses only got a glimpse, clouds, smoke. That’s another reason why v14 speaks so loudly. When it says in verse 14 – Word/flesh/dwelled/observed/glory with these words

Unlike anything ever experienced before, they saw. Jesus has the same glory that Moses saw a glimpse/heard. This is God in flesh.

18No one has ever seen God. The one and only Son, who is himself God and is at the Father’s side—he has revealed him.

Something/someone was revealed with more clarity than ever before.

For a long time, I am pretty sure I stopped really reading in verse 14. Understandably my heart was full. Looking back, I don’t think I realized how much more there was to grasp, especially in verses 16-17

16Indeed, we have all received grace upon grace from his fullness, 17for the law was given through Moses; grace and truth came through Jesus Christ.

The law (or TORAH) was given through Moses (17). Think about the first 5 books of the Bible. There’s grace in what Moses recorded. (Abraham’s family, delivered out of Egypt, 10 words, specifics spelled out, pleasing sacrifices, offerings in Leviticus, atonement, tent of meeting, nation created and people guided and held together, glimpse into the character of God). That’s grace.

Jesus comes and takes all the Moses-grace (the grace that Moses communicated in the Torah), and fulfills all of that. What we have now is grace upon grace.

Verse 17 adds more. Grace and truth CAME THROUGH Jesus. That is adding to verse 14. We’re not just observers, but the grace from Jesus is something all those who follow and trust in Jesus receive (16). Grace and truth “comes through Jesus” to you, and it wouldn’t be wrong to word it this way: Grace and Truth happen to you.

Not just an observer of grace, but someone who experiences and enjoys it. It gets real.

Try to help you appreciate the distinction I am making.

It’s one thing to know someone is a very generous person. It’s another thing for them to give you something (need, a token of love). Generosity happens to you.

Physical therapist is good at what she does, regain quality of life because of work she’s done. PT happens to you.

It’s one thing to have a friend who is wise, it’s another thing to hear their wisdom, to put it into practice, and have it personally spare you a lot of headaches. Wisdom happens to you.

It’s one thing to know someone is very musically gifted, it’s another thing to have your soul filled with their music.

It’s one thing to be able to open a theology textbook, find the section about God’s glory, and read all about his truth and grace. It’s another thing for truth and grace to happen to you personally.

You personally experience the Light coming in your direction, opening your eyes, revealing the lies, pointing you to the only way where your life will mean all it was supposed to mean.

You personally experience the Life of God coming in your direction, overwhelming you with deep kindness giving you life to the max.

You personally experience the Word of God speaking to you in clarity, hope, truth, help, love, grace.

Christ was born for THIS —> For Grace/Truth to HAPPEN to you. Not for you to admire a meaningful story from a distance, not for you to understand a few concepts, but to meet a person who changes everything about you for the better.

Words/Concepts that convey the truth that grace happens to us. You might have heard Christians talk about these.

Conversion – the grace of change, the truth of receiving a new natureRegeneration – the grace of new birth happens, the truth that something came from nothingSalvation/Rescue – the truth of living in danger/catastrophe; grace happening which brings you outUnion – grace of being forever linked with Jesus [in Christ]Indwelling –grace of the Spirit God living in you, truth that he assures you with and the truthful guarantees he makes.

What does it look like when grace/truth happen in your life?

When the family rug gets pulled out from you, your life isn’t over. You find some footing.

Life begins to knock out all the props. Things get very uncertain, it’s hard to know which end is up, and the anxiety won’t quit. The Lord is your refuge and strength.

When our bodies begin to fall apart. We know some of this is or could be awful, but God is preparing an eternal weight of glory. The Lord gives, the Lord takes away.

We realize even death won’t separate us from the love of God.

Your heart comes alive to that.

not in a pious overly spiritual sort of way, but with joy that cannot be taken, peace that can’t be shaken, love that permeates every part of who you are. Grace and truth happen to you when you receive Jesus by faith. Not just for a moment, but now the Lord stands by you.

CONCLUSION

I enjoy a good road trip, and it’s been worth making a way-too-brief stop at John 1. Have you met, will you meet this full-of-grace-and-truth person? What would be your first step? Who is a person you could talk with, reach out to, help celebrate with, tell this good news to?  I want to leave you with a second to think about that, and then I will pray.

<><><><><>

12.14.2025  Brainerd  (Sunday AM)