ARE YOU IN?HE SAID THIS ABOUT THE SPIRITJOHN 7:37-39

TITLE SLIDE

My first psychology class in college was taught by a former Secret Service agent. I distinctly remember a day where for the whole class we watched video footage of the Reagan assassination attempt. Our professor would show a few frames, and then pause the video and then explain. This is who this is. This is what you just saw. This is what’s happening. Notice this. This is the psychology behind it.

That went through my mind because our author John (an eyewitness) does this: This is what Jesus said. And writing years/decades later, with the benefit of seeing a bigger picture, he can say this is exactly what was happening and what Jesus meant

37On the last and most important day of the festival, Jesus stood up and cried out, “If anyone is thirsty, let him come to me and drink. 38The one who believes in me, as the Scripture has said, will have streams of living water flow from deep within him.” [PAUSE]

What a STRONG invitation from Jesus to everyone/anyone (no wonder he stood up, raised his voice). So clear, so encouraging. Simply believe in Jesus, and your life will dramatically change. You will never be the same.  This isn’t Jesus’ first invitation like this and it will not be his last.

39He said this about the Spirit. Those who believed in Jesus were going to receive the Spirit, for the Spirit had not yet been given because Jesus had not yet been glorified.

Today, I want us to hear the invitation but also John’s remark. I alluded to this last week, but I want to spend time trying to better understand the Holy Spirit. John says that this is what Jesus was talking about.

3 things I should probably say before we even get going.

We will be in the deep end today. Some of you will swim just fine. Others, it may be helpful to kind of hug the side of the pool. You’re going to be okay, but I didn’t want you to feel like “man, this is hard to process.” That’s true. Fair warning, we’re in the deep end.

We can’t and won’t be able to get to everything we want to say about the Holy Spirit. That’s okay. I still hope to give you a few handles from these verses that can help.

I will try to apply what we’re learning to everyday life, but this may be one of those occasions where what is driven home in our hearts is knowing our God, the Holy Spirit better. Much like you would get to know a friend better, or a person that matters a lot to you better. When that happens, no one chalks that up to a poor use of time. We’re better when we get to know someone we love better. That can happen today. I pray it does.

So, Father, send your Holy Spirit once again to help us understand him, open our eyes to understand and love Jesus and worship you more deeply. Help us experience all the grace you have for us! Amen

A few handles. Let’s start with INSEPARABLE – Jesus and the Holy Spirit are distinct, yet inseparable. You can’t divide them. you never truly have one without the other. When one is at work, the other is at work as well.

Here in John 7:37-39 –  Come to me, believe in me (Jesus the focal point) -> receive the Spirit. The Father (and the Son) give the Spirit to those who believe in Jesus

INSEPARABLE as in Word/Breath.

Inseparable throughout the Scripture account of JESUS’ LIFE

Jesus is conceived by the Spirit; When he is baptized the Spirit rests on Him; When he is tempted the Spirit was leading and directing

As he taught, healed, ministered, the Spirit was “on” him, he was led, empowered, rejoiced in the Spirit. Jesus and the Holy Spirit are inseparable

The most common biblical NAME for the Spirit is Holy Spirit, but he is also

Acts 16:7 – the Spirit of Jesus                Romans 8:9 – the Spirit of ChristGal. 4:6 –the Spirit of his Son   Phil. 1:19 – the Spirit of Jesus Christ

STATEMENTS – We also hear “inseparable” from Paul who wrote

Romans 8:9 – If you don’t have the Spirit, you don’t belong to Jesus (opposite is true)

1 Cor 12:3 – You don't say Jesus is Lord except by the Holy Spirit

Some comfort this reality brings to me – I don’t always understand the Holy Spirit, often I grasp things about Jesus better. but that doesn’t mean the Spirit isn’t present or active in my life. I have come to Jesus, and so I have received the Spirit. Actually, I know the Spirit has been present (encounters with God over the years), and the only reason I understand more about Jesus is because the Spirit is doing deep work in me. Anytime I enjoy the life of Jesus, , the Spirit is doing something good in my heart.

Jesus and the Holy Spirit are inseparable. The next helpful handle

COMPLETION – The Holy Spirit fully applies to us all that has been accomplished through Jesus

The Holy Spirit brings the work of God to completion, culmination, fruition. The Spirit fully applies what has been accomplished by Jesus.

You see an implied milestone in this passage

37On the last and most important day of the festival, Jesus stood up and cried out, “If anyone is thirsty, let him come to me and drink. 38The one who believes in me, as the Scripture has said, will have streams of living water flow from deep within him.” 39He said this about the Spirit. Those who believed in Jesus were going to receive the Spirit, for the Spirit had not yet been given because Jesus had not yet been glorified.

“Going to, not yet, not yet.” There is a timing in what happened on that last and most important festival day, and when John wrote these words. Something had been brought to completion.

John is saying not only that one day Jesus would be glorified, but that from his vantage point writing decades after these events, one day Jesus was glorified. Keep reading John and you will see “glorified” refers to the whole cluster of events that happened – after living perfectly, Jesus is crucified as a sacrificial lamb taking our sins, and removing those from our record, he is buried, rises from the dead, ascends to the Father and receives the glory He is due. And days after that the Holy Spirit is given to believers.

When that happens – streams of living water become available to all who will believe, and these flow deep within the one who believes.

There is an order we see in Scripture, even though Father, Son, Spirit are always working, and are always working together, there are spotlights

The Father plans, designs, originates, things come from Him. “I believe in God the Father Almighty, Maker of heaven and earth.”

Jesus accomplishes and executes that plan, mediates relationships between people. Jesus paid it all. Jesus blood and righteousness.

The Spirit takes the work of Father/Son, and applies it. He works and fills out in our lives what Jesus has done for us. Inseparable but distinct.

They all work together. The order and sequence matter, and one way I see it mattering is that the Son had to accomplish work before the Spirit could live in us, so that you could be a dwelling place for God.

From the beginning, God desires to dwell with his people.

From shortly after the beginning of humans, there is a huge obstacle to that happening. We sin. God doesn’t dwell in sin.

God initiates a covenant, promising to do all that is necessary to deal with that sin.

Lev. 26:11–12 11I will place my residence among you, and I will not reject you. 12I will walk among you and be your God, and you will be my people.

We see shadows in the Old Testament in the Temple/Tabernacle. Some strict ways it had to be “made holy” and pure. Layers of prep to prepare.

Those were just shadows. But God makes promises that one day he would not only dwell with people in a sense of a physical building. We trace the storyline and realize WE now are the Temple he is purifying.

Jesus came to make people clean/new, to do whatever is necessary to prepare, sanctify, cleanse, renew, bring us to life. He cleanses the new temple which is US!

When Jesus is glorified – complete spotlight of praise, honor, every knee bowing, angels praising “Worthy is the Lamb.” The work is accomplished.

Jesus does work, and then the Spirit is given to Peter, James, Thomas, Mary, and it didn’t stop with them (Jeff, Stephanie, Karl)

What a realization sets in. The Spirit completes. God will not quit on me. He doesn’t dabble in my life. Through the Spirit, He will continue to apply benefit after benefit of what Jesus has done for me. Another year goes by, and the Spirit has had another 365 days to apply what Jesus has done for me to my heart, head, actions, understanding, feelings, motivations.

We’re trying to grasp powerful truths in Scripture. We see how Jesus and the Spirit are inseparable, how the Spirit fully applies the work and brings it to completion. Read closely and notice the words (from deep within streams of living water flow). When we receive the Spirit, he lives IN US.

The word we use is INDWELLING. The Holy Spirit resides deep inside a believer. Deep within YOU!

This is a new era that David, Sarah, Daniel, Ruth, Abraham, Esther, Moses didn’t know. There’s a massive difference.

Some of you have studied the Old Testament. It was the era of prophets, priests, kings, individuals. They were often anointed. The Spirit came on them, task specific.

In the OT there’s a hunger for more. There are promises of a day coming.

Joel 2:28 – After this I will pour out my Spirit on all humanity; then your sons and your daughters will prophesy, your old men will have dreams, and your young men will see visions.

There is another layer. Listen to another promise

Ezekiel 36:26–27 26I will give you a new heart and put a new spirit within you; I will remove your heart of stone and give you a heart of flesh. 27I will place my Spirit within you and cause you to follow my statutes and carefully observe my ordinances.

What a promise to hang on to. What did it mean when Jesus came. Jesus was the first who completely lived in the realm of the Spirit. The Spirt was in Jesus directing and bringing to life every single thing he did.

In John there is this picture in the very end after crucifixion and resurrection. The disciples are gathered. Jesus comes to them, shows them his hands and side, and they are filled with joy because Jesus is alive.

21Jesus said to them again, “Peace be with you. As the Father has sent me, I also send you.” 22After saying this, he breathed on them and said, “Receive the Holy Spirit.

It’s a preview for the disciples of what would happen on a larger scale a few weeks later we have Acts 2 where what Joel prophesied happened. The Holy Spirit comes to live INSIDE people, men, women, Jews, Gentiles.

New life is breathed into us.

God breathed into Adam/humans – they became a living soulSin causes us to die – breathe our lastBy grace, we can receive God’s breath/Spirit in us and come to life again, and we will live eternally.

God takes up residence in our lives.

Listen, because the Spirit is residing in us: He deeply advocates, teaches, guides, speaks, helps, assures, decides. We can grieve, lie to him. VERY new era, and we know He’s a person deep inside us.

But, there’s a challenge because the Spirit is associated with very impersonal things. He is wind, breath, fire, water, poured out, seals, fills, produces fruit

It’s easy to get confused by this. The work he does in us and on us is unlike any other. This is God in us. Human language and understanding are stretched to the max. So, we stretch language and concepts to try to appreciate what it looks like when God is inside us.

It makes such a difference in our worship – praise God as his child. In you, drawing your heart to praise God, praise Jesus Christ

John 4:24 – God is spirit, and those who worship him must worship in Spirit and in truth.”

Think about the difference in prayer – needs as a human to your Father. The Spirit is in you, helping you in your weakness, leading you to say Abba

Romans 8:26 26In the same way the Spirit also helps us in our weakness, because we do not know what to pray for as we should, but the Spirit himself intercedes for us with inexpressible groanings.

Galatians 4:6 – And because you are sons, God sent the Spirit of his Son into our hearts, crying, “Abba, Father!”

Think about our understanding, how the Spirit is illuminating what the Bible teaches. In you, helping you grasp the things of God

1 Cor 2:12 – We have received the Spirit who comes from God that we might understand what has been freely given to us by God

And think about the gifts that the Spirit gives to benefit the body for the gospel and for growth. In you, working on your natural abilities, and maybe even special God-given enablements/capacities for a season

1 Corinthians 12:4–7 4Now there are different gifts, but the same Spirit. 5There are different ministries, but the same Lord. 6And there are different activities, but the same God works all of them in each person. 7A manifestation of the Spirit is given to each person for the common good:

And think about the fruit – relationship with others/circumstances

Galatians 5:22–23 22But the fruit of the Spirit is love, joy, peace, patience, kindness, goodness, faithfulness, 23gentleness, and self-control. The law is not against such things.

The Spirit is in you, rewiring things about you

I hope a few things have been clearer for you. We’ve heard what made John pause and give some clarity. By God’s grace, maybe something fresh has sunk in

Inseparable, Completion, Indwelling.

It may have helped you know God the Spirit better. In the end, it’s not just about knowing more details, it’s about knowing a person. One verse to close our time

Hosea 6:6 – For I desire (want you to show) faithful love and not sacrifice, the knowledge of God  (I want you to know me) rather than (more than I want) burnt offerings.

<><><><><>

6.29.2025    Brainerd  (Sunday AM)