HOW TO “PRACTICE RIGHTEOUSNESS”HOW TO TRUSTMATTHEW 6:25-34

INTRO: I would love to hear more about what the Spirit is teaching you through the words of Jesus about Practicing Righteousness

When we’ve talked about how to give to the needy, pray, fast (say no to things temporarily or voluntarily) – what are you learning about God? What are you learning about yourself? Are you growing? How?

I’m sure I couldn’t sit down for hours with every one of you (the math doesn’t work, right?), although I would treasure that, I still would love to hear from some of you how God is at work. Would some of you be willing to share that with me, or with one of our pastors?

Here’s something I love: Jesus can so helpfully talk about these practices of righteousness. But, he’s never going to let us be satisfied to do rituals, and disengage from a relationship.

So, as part of a practicing righteousness discussion, he teaches us HOW TO TRUST. We practice righteousness by deeply trusting.

Let’s look at the Bible 25“Therefore I tell you: Don’t worry about your life, what you will eat or what you will drink; or about your body, what you will wear. Isn’t life more than food and the body more than clothing?

“Don’t worry” is said THREE times in 10 verses. Don’t worry.

Jesus targets the most basic things (what you will eat, drink, wear). Let’s be real. Food, drink, clothes occupy a lot of our time, until the last day comes when you will eat your last bite or put on your clothes for the last time. In between now and then, don’t worry about any of that.

If we’re not supposed to worry about the most basic of conditions that mean our survival, then what else aren’t we supposed to worry about. Life is much more than these things, Jesus say.

Life is greater than grilled chicken, apple juice and blue jeans.

Life is more than texts/posts, semester grades, retirement/bank accounts, pathology reports.

Don’t worry. Those words land differently for the…

professional grade worriers – you’ve got battle scars to show for a lifetime of worry. At least some of that (actually maybe a lot), is your temperament, home you grew up in, made it more conducive. Patterns formed, remember some of your first panic attacks, or you know where the stomach medicine is, now here you are. Jesus speaks to you here. Don’t tune him out. He can help.

There are also the worry DABBLERS. Your temperament rarely takes you down the worry path; occasionally there’s a spike, you deal with it. But this area of life all seems pretty simple. Jesus speaks to you

Whether you are a professional or a dabbler, Jesus gives directives, orders, commands: don’t worry. I don’t have the right to “yeah, but.”

Having said that there is something special about how he commands. It doesn’t come off as a

“Just stop it, you idiot OR Don’t even think about it, you loser.”

Jesus gives “comfort-commands” (which ≠ easy) They’re no less demanding. But Jesus’ commands often land like this… You can quit worrying about your life. Often his commands come with a because (and I don’t believe we’re owed this). But imagine Jesus saying you can quit worrying about your life because…

you can really trust your Father’s personal care (good intentions) and powerful capabilities. His ultimate design for you will be something very valuable (2 Corinthians). Do you hear how a comfort-command sounds so differently?

Who is he talking to? He’s not just speaking to the paycheck-to-paycheck folks about food/drink/clothes; he’s also speaking to the extra closet, and the extra freezer people. In a wealthy economy we need the words MORE, not less

Have you experienced the vicious cycle (for a wealthier economy): The more you have, the more you have to lose, life can become more and more about acquiring things to give us security and protection against the losses. And then we have more. Don’t worry. Help us, Lord.

This is some tough stuff, and we need some easy-to-remember lessons. Maybe if we had something like that, it would trigger something helpful.

26Consider the birds of the sky: They don’t sow or reap or gather into barns, yet your heavenly Father feeds them. Aren’t you worth more than they? 27Can any of you add one moment to his life span by worrying?

THE BIRD LESSON

Your heavenly Father actively feeds birds, despite them not being responsible to give it any thought. You are an embodied soul made in his image. What do you believe you’re worth to him? Would providing for you be on the list of priorities to Him?

Let’s go further: this side of Jesus dying/rising/ruling, leaving the Spirit with us, He could add to us now

you are united to meyou are the residence of the Holy Spirit, who I have given to you, placed inside of you as a downpayment to redeemI am committed to an eternal relationship with youYour ultimate good is of the highest priority to me

So, don’t worry. Or as a comfort-command. You really don’t have to worry, do you? And it really doesn’t help anything anyway does it? (27)

“worrying a lot added years to my life” said no one, ever

So simple. So important. So hard sometimes…

Could we do something proactive?  In addition to letting birds be a reminder of our Father’s care

I often think of Kids Ministry, and the desire for kids to literally take something home. VBS / Sunday School – popsicle sticks, coloring sheet, piggy bank, globe

What if you took home a few liturgies [order/pattern of something like a worship service (formal/informal)]? I don’t want you to overthink this. So, is it “too spiritual” for when you

Go grocery shopping / quick run to a convenience storeDo some food prep / cleanupEat a quick power snack, or some pick-me-up caffeine. Reason #7341 NOT to worry.

Would that help reinforce – just as those birds get fed by my Heavenly Father, I am getting fed by Him as well. What must I mean to him?

He loves us, oh how he loves us. And he is our portion and we are his prize, drawn to redemption by the grace in his eyes, if his grace is an ocean, we’re all sinking

The bird lesson is helpful, and another similar lesson helps as well.

28And why do you worry about clothes? Observe how the wildflowers of the field grow: They don’t labor or spin thread.  29Yet I tell you that not even Solomon in all his splendor was adorned like one of these. 30If that’s how God clothes the grass of the field, which is here today and thrown into the furnace tomorrow, won’t he do much more for you—you of little faith?

THE WILDFLOWER LESSON

Wildflowers don’t map out an intentional plan for how they will grow. Median of an interstate, vacant lots. Internationally, I see them as well. No intentionality, not in a greenhouse, a garden or in a Conservatory.

God decks out something so inconsequential to such an amazing degree (Solomon proportions). He does it every day, and he does it all over the world). Are we getting the message?

God takes care of something temporary like grass. He clothes it.

You’re higher on the priority list. You know that, right?

You of “little faith.” You’re just barely believing sometimes, and you still rate high. Because little faith is still genuine faith. Jesus takes care of believers in Him.

He grants special privileges with the Father (abba)He gives the Holy Spirit to assure and help.He actively personally mediates your best interests before the Father (no one else is sent as a representative)

So the comfort-command, you really can quit worrying.

Negatively – What’s on your “To-worry about” list. Let’s take a look at that. What should populate this? What begins to be helped by me providing some extra worry to it.

Positively – Liturgies - (is it too spiritual)

getting dressed/changed – I am protected today (full armor / clothed in Jesus’ righteousness, just clothes; God clothes you)

laundry – God has given me these clothes. I really don’t have to worry.

Shopping – pick up something we need, or something we’d just like to have, and we realize again, I have clothes on my back, because of his good care.

I wonder if slowly, but surely, your heart begins to move. It’s not that worry isn’t a part of your life. It’s not as if you can’t spiral, or that intrusive thoughts may not have your number one day. But, you actually begin to see progress, and it’s noticeable. It’s not just about hacks or techniques. Your trust level with your heavenly Father is growing. You’re becoming a new creation, old things are passing away. Things are becoming new. Praise God.

Yes, you really can quit worrying, but that’s a choice, a constant choice.

31So don’t worry, saying, ‘What will we eat?’ or ‘What will we drink?’ or ‘What will we wear?’ 32For the Gentiles eagerly seek all these things, and your heavenly Father knows that you need them. 33But seek first the kingdom of God and his righteousness, and all these things will be provided for you.

Eagerly seek = obsession; Life is completely consumed with gathering stuff, and it’s pretty pagan (Gentiles)

3000000 gods who might or might not take care of you

goddess of the moon or the TN river controls your fortune, it’s understandable as to why you might feel insecure

the god of technology/human progress/AI

Stay on top of all the breaking news, hang hopes on every scientific discovery you can, you have to

Center of your universe.

Find a lucky trinket, obsess about your parlay or prop bet, powerball numbers.

If you have a distant deity who doesn’t care – I get why you might be convinced that’s the only way you get the care you need.

But that’s not who you would be or are in Jesus Christ. For you, there is a different way to live – A simple seeking

His kingdom/rule/authority over everything

His righteous will being done always in every circumstance

Obsess, no; just seek! He’s not telling you that you have to be in the top 5% of your class of Christians. Just one who seeks the kingdom

What is God doing here?How would He want his Son/Daughter to respond?What can I trust Him for in this situation?What neighbor could I show love to?How do my priorities need to be reset in light of him?What weakness can be turned into a display of his strength?

What Jesus says next just makes me smile.

With some sanctified imagination, I imagine Jesus teaching this, and someone raising his hand (and maybe it was one of my favorite disciples – skeptical Thomas) – I am doing okay with today, even better than I used to, Jesus. I am learning to trust our Father, and it’s changing me. But what about tomorrow? Are there any guarantees. How can I process tomorrow? It’s as if Jesus smiles.

34Therefore don’t worry about tomorrow, because tomorrow will worry about itself. Each day has enough trouble of its own.

The concern He anticipates is the “what-about-tomorrow” concern

Okay, I have my act together for today. But, I just don’t know what tomorrow will bring. And I don’t feel like I am in control of tomorrow.

You’re exactly right. You don’t and you can’t. **go back to verse 25, and start listening to Jesus again.

CONCLUSION

I think Jesus envisioned hundreds of years down the road. I believe he envisioned gatherings like this one, of his followers, people who had been brought into a right relationship with the Father through the gift of His righteousness.  Followers who wanted to put their faith into practice. And so, he left us with the most powerful reminder to build our trust.

We call it the Lord’s Supper.

Regular reminder – we do this regularly, because we can so easily forget (even with birds and flowers) how well our Father has provided for us in Jesus.

Simple reminder – We aren’t climbing Everest or reciting Beowulf. We put elements together (bread/juice). Simple

Tangible reminder – as you taste food and we eat/drink, our Father provides for us. Taste and see that the Lord is good.

Corporate reminder – we take it together in communion with each other. I will say that this is for all who identify with the death and resurrection of Jesus. If that isn’t you, feel free to pass the plate by and let’s explore more what it means to follow Jesus. But, together you are with brothers and sisters who are saying, “I am His. He is mine. We are His, and He is ours.

Come to me. I will give you rest.

<><><><><>

11.23.2025  Brainerd  (Sunday AM)