ARE YOU IN?JESUS NOTICES HURTING PEOPLEJOHN 5:1-14

INTRO: I’ve believed for a while that most good things in life take time. They’re the result of processes, perseverance and patience. I still believe that. At the same time, I also see where there are literally minutes or even seconds that have a strong direct impact on so many things down the road. Minutes and seconds can change our lives.

You’re going to see that from the Bible today. We like to take chunks of the Bible and work our way through them. At the end of last year, we finished up John 4, and I want us to jump back into the book of John, starting with chapter 5, and make our way through it.

As you might guess, the main subject is Jesus. Encounter after encounter with Jesus will raise the question, ARE YOU IN?  [TITLE SLIDE] Are you believing in Jesus? Are you ready to follow him? Are you in?

Let’s look at 5:1-3  Notice just how

JESUS FINDS, SEES AND LOVES THE UNWELL

The scene: a festival, Jerusalem would be overcrowded, dozens of little sideshows, big things happening with big important people.

The first place people thought of for big important things to happen would NOT be the Bethesda Pool

Tradition about this pool (incorporated into some manuscripts and translations and marginal notes): water stirs (because of an angel), people try to be the first, golden ticket for healing

Notice the crowd – blind, lame, paralyzed (large number of disabled/unwell)

During festival weeks, there are places in Jerusalem where if you are trying to build a platform, network, etc., some places where you would want to make your mark. This pool isn’t one of those places.

Jesus goes to places like this (and this kind of situation finds him).

A world that’s groaning with visible reminders that everything isn’t yet as it will be. The sick, struggling, the unwell

Our people in the medical community make such a difference, and feel such a calling into professions. I am amazed.

Let’s acknowledge something There are so many stories of people with disabilities that are filled with courage, inspire, but that shouldn’t mean we don’t see reality, the things that are hard.

since the accident, incident, stroke

Here’s something I’ve grown to appreciate. (verse 5)

5One man was there who had been disabled for thirty-eight years.

There was one man; disabled for 38 years. Jesus doesn’t just do macro-care where he generically loves everyone, he’s regularly dialed into the micro needs. One person. Let’s zoom in

Jesus “saw” this man. (6) Easy to miss, easy to take for granted. Jesus initiates conversations (all the time).

Jesus sees those who have almost been discarded, who they are, what they are worth to God, what they bring in themselves, as they are (not just objects to be pitied), but human beings to be taken seriously and loved

He would have seen the 38-year pain (not just 38 minutes)

This is vintage Jesus, this is classic Jesus. This is why we love him.

This could look very different. “Jesus always showed up in VIP lounges, and celebrity galas. Or even “in classrooms, performing arts, job sites.” Instead Jesus shows up around people that are clearly unwell. They need something he can give.

Jesus did this so often. It’s meant to send a signal, to everyone, to every single human being, that we don’t have it all together.

It’s easy to see physical; But what about the neurological, chemical, mental, emotional breakdowns.

Of course, there’s always a spiritual deficit. We don’t have clean hands or a pure heart.

We need Him. We aren’t okay. You may be young, top of your career, awesome health and fitness, mentally sharp. Or you might be wrestling with addictions, depression, anger, eating disorders, problems with your heart or cancer. Or spiritual dryness, or anxiety, or selfishness, or envy, or gossip. But, down to the bone, things aren’t okay. And Jesus finds, sees and loves the unwell.

Jesus comes with a question: do you want to be well (6), and simply by asking the question, we can be prepared to observe as

JESUS INITIATES LIFE-ALTERING CHANGE

The conversation has to start somewhere, a connection has to be made somehow. Often, these first words of Jesus are an invitation, here it will come with an intention to do something for this man, in this man, with this man, for his good .

notice v7 (w/8-9) – Jesus’ question isn’t answered, and he ends up listening to a complaint (rather than an answer), which is really an indictment – no one ever helps me, I’m just taken advantage of!

So, nothing in the man would cause us to think He’s going to have something life-altering happen. What should blow our mind is the power of Jesus in 3 verbal commands. Notice the immediacy of the change – not a prescription for 15 weeks of this. Life-altering change.

This man was so helpless, and his earthly existence changes – Remember how desperate the situation would’ve been. There’s no social security, disability provisions. He has mobility issues, personal hygiene issues, work issues – all changed in a few words. Jesus radically changes things.

It’s true that we see change all the time: a friend, a new boss, employee, girlfriend, boyfriend, mentor, they can bring significant change to a person, or an organization (catalytic). Level 5 leaders in Good to Great make a difference.

For all the impressive change humans can design and do, this level of change isn’t one of them. And yet God does this all the time – bringing a piece of heaven to earth

We haven’t yet reached the place where everyone is healed all the time. Brokenness eliminated, the effects of sin over. We aren’t there yet. In every miracle that Jesus did like this he gives us a taste, but what a taste [all things new]

Hundreds of years before, this was said about the Messiah who would come to change lives

Isaiah 35:4–6 –  “Be strong; do not fear! Here is your God; vengeance is coming. God’s retribution is coming; he will save you.” Then the eyes of the blind will be opened, and the ears of the deaf unstopped. Then the lame will leap like a deer, and the tongue of the mute will sing for joy, for water will gush in the wilderness, and streams in the desert;

From the beginning, we’re 15-20 seconds into this interaction, Jesus has done more than a magic trick. These are the kinds of things Jesus can do and does do now (even if it’s not vending machine, genie; it’s relationship, and we have to grow in trust of a wise Father)

18– heart change; 25– new desires, new stability, 35– new gifting, boldness, life remapped, 60– awakening, new community, priorities

This is Jesus

We’ll talk about this more in a second, but the story begins to fall apart and go off the rails here. (9-12)

Jesus said “pick up your mat.” The man walks. That violated a Sabbath rule, not so much Scripture, but an extra one that got added over time, more like Article 7, Section 39, and the hyper-vigilant mat-police aren’t going to let this slide.

Side note about the Sabbath – Sabbath was a gift which had been turned into a detailed measuring stick, or an opportunity to parade how devoted you were (Jesus confronted this all the time). What was all about God and grace had begun to override helping the needy

While we parade all the things we DON’T do on the Sabbath, while we police the details of everyone’s life, the work of God happens, and we’re calling a violation. Whistle blows, a penalty flag is thrown.

They tag the formerly-lame guy with a violation.

The guy responds – Not my fault. The man who healed me. The man that made me walk after 38 years of not walking. The man who spoke and gave me an entirely new life. The man who changed everything for me, just by showing up at the pool of Bethesda.

Response – Who does that guy think he is telling you that you could carry stuff on the Sabbath. Where is he?

Oh, I didn’t really pay attention to who it was. I didn’t get a name. We really didn't have much of an interaction.

Bizarre scene, but it starts pointing to something significant. Jesus disappears into the crowd (verse 13). In this disappearance we can see

JESUS SERVES OTHERS HUMBLY

A publicity stunt to get more favorable press and flattering attention is never a purpose for the action of Jesus. Individuals mean too much to him. He isn’t going to capitalize on a miracle at this man’s expense

It turns out, you really can’t hide miracles like this. But, we all know that the fame/notoriety isn’t going to lead him to big influencer deals. Actually, the religious establishment in Jerusalem will try to ensure these things lead to death not influence.

Jesus operates so differently from what we might expect. When I read Flags of Our Fathers, I found most of it stirring so many emotions.

Photo on Iwo Jima, become iconic, could be utilized for morale and for money. These guys need to be on a publicity tour. How difficult.

Jesus serves humbly. He doesn’t do something for you, only to exploit it for his good, and not yours.

That has to drive us as a church, Brainerd. The mission, ministry that God has called us to is about people. And I would say lots of people. I’ve prayed that the Lord would let us play a role in a lot of people’s lives.

At the same time, the way of Jesus points us in very different marketing directions than Google, Meta, X seem to have on their brain.

Jesus does find the man. There’s a more personal introduction. Verse 14

He’s saying, “Appreciate this aspect of being well. It’s a gift. Not everyone at the pool received that in exactly the same way.”

But then something seems out of place. He talks about SIN

A lot of speculation – some specific sin that caused this (some clues in that direction); not every problem can tie directly to a particular sin

Jesus brings up the “sin issue.” Just to be clear, sin is moral failing, it’s missing the mark/target (just missed, defiantly shot the other direction), rebelled, there’s a fault. I tracked “sin” in John:

commit sin (8:34), not believing (16:9), a lifestyle, living “In your sin” (8:24)

—> become a slave (8:34)—> condemnation, guilty without an excuse (15:22)—> ultimately, you die in your sin (8:24)

There’s an awful progression. Jesus tells this man, there’s something bigger than being healed from your disability, something worse than what you’ve experienced. Jesus isn’t unsympathetic. Sin has to be dealt with, walked away from. You don’t want to be half-healed, or be left half-dead.

Lamb of God came (1:29) to take away the sin of the world; believe in the work of the Father through Jesus; after the cross, we hear Jesus speak of sins being forgiven (John 20:23)

So, putting that together, we can see that Jesus came to deal with sin.

JESUS RESCUES PEOPLE ETERNALLY

Leaving a life of sin = looking to the lamb, internal change because of Him

What gift of love and righteousness. For this man, a double-healing was available [walking and being right with God for eternity]

This story is powerful. It gives a picture of Jesus that is so compelling. And we will build on portraits like this one. But the results here are unsatisfying. It’s a downer. There are so many MISSES. And we need to see them. This should move people to Jesus

We don’t see the crowd embrace Jesus. They should be, right?

Persecuting, trying to kill Jesus. Asking, “Who does he think he is? Is he bigger than the Sabbath? Does he think He’s God, getting to control things, make decisions?” These are the right questions and there’s zero interest in a good faith asking of them.

Jesus is a threat, obstacle, nuisance. This will move to a cross. That’s likely NOT where we are, even though it’s true Jesus can be pretty inconvenient to our agenda

We don’t see the man really embrace Jesus (He receives a gift, and we see that that gift in the bigger context) – maybe he really did; we find a very different kind of picture with the blind man in John 9.

Focus on the pool and his mind is the deck stacked perpetually against him.

Seems like the right place for a word of caution – Holy Spirit come to us, “are you ready to change.” these people, this situation, this disadvantage —> that’s my problem!

Not really dialed in to the man who changed everything

We know others would immediately follow Jesus, others would say, “you have to meet a man.” This one seems to say, “If you’re asking, he did it.”

Maybe we ARE there – experienced a whole lot of grace, but somewhere Jesus got lost in the shuffle.

CONCLUSION – It’s a question. It will be running in the background for this portion of John: ARE YOU IN?

The invitation doesn’t seem overly complex. Yet the proud, smug, judgmental, those full of themselves, always seem to be on the outside looking in, by their choice. They seem to regularly find Jesus as either a threat or just an annoyance.

But, there also is just a troubling way where we could just be not really paying attention. Maybe it’s a hard life, or just life that you’ve gotten so used to, the one who stands before creation doesn’t even seem to get an audience with you. But, at some point you have to make a decision.

It takes a lot to build trust.

With Jesus, you don’t really come with bargains. He’s merciful, but it’s not a result of your shrewd negotiating. He doesn’t ask you to come with your own performance-improvement plan to make yourself well.

He finds you, he sees you, he loves you, even as you might be really stuck today. You don’t have to stay on that path. You don’t have to miss out on communion with Him. You can keep listening, leaning in. Could you follow him? What would that mean for you? How much of your life could He reasonably call the shots on? Are you in?

Big Prayer – Jesus. You are my Lord. I love you only because you loved me first. I need your rescue from my sin. Change my life forever. Make me yours. Keep revealing yourself to me. I want to keep following you. Have mercy on me. Amen.

<><><><><>

4.27.2025    Brainerd  (Sunday AM)