ARE YOU IN?YOU DON’T WANT TO GO AWAYJOHN 6:30-71

TITLE SLIDE

There are so many places in the Bible that I find lift my spirits. I could start to name them, but there really are just so many. AND there are parts of the Bible that make me really, really sad. I don’t know that too many things are as sad as this…

John 6:66 66From that moment many of his disciples turned back and no longer accompanied him.

Let me try to help you process some of what has happened

Set the scene – chap 5 is a Jesus-miracle chapter (lame man starts walking), chap 6 is a miracle chapter (5000+ people are fed).

Approval ratings are high. Jesus is not just a teacher, our next KING, “Let’s go. Let’s do this.” Genuine buzz, people are motivated to follow, they are so interested, and locked-in.

Then there are things that Jesus says/teaches that change the dynamic. Disciples who were interested, motivated, following NOW struggling

6:60 makes sure we see the “check engine” light on. Jesus said things that were hard to accept, understand, didn’t quite fit their expectations, fulfill their hopes.

Now it is full blown turning, walking away (desertion), following no more. Picture #1. Then, John 6:66. Then full picture.

This is sad, but not necessarily surprising. (Wide Path away)

What was defective? How did this happen? I don't want to be so proud that I think it could not happen to me. I don't want you to be so naïve that you think it could never happen to you. Lord, have mercy on us!

Could we hold this up as a mirror? See some things we need to see

Facts are, you might have taken your first few steps away from Jesus.

You may be pretty conscious that your walk with Jesus is not in the same place as it was before. Something’s different, and you seem to be headed in a different direction. I’m glad you're here. I want you to be honest about it. Don’t pretend. Don’t feel the need to fake it. Maybe we can dig deeper and see some things today that could help.

But, there may also be another category of us here today. You may not be walking that path (away), but I may be turned and looking toward it, seems attractive, seems worth flirting with.

I am convinced you don’t have to walk that road.

If we back all the way up to verse 30, it might be a little more clear

“What sign, then, are you going to do so that we may see and believe you?” they asked. “What are you going to perform?”

Reference a time in the past when God miraculously fed people 6 days a week. “When we see that we will believe.” They see SO much initial promise with Jesus – divine bread maker – yeah food, but it’s the spectacle. I need to keep seeing the statement miracles.

The next big thing doesn’t seem to be Jesus’ priority. His identity, what he’s doing for them is the big thing.

33For the bread of God is the one who comes down from heaven and gives life to the world.”35“I am the bread of life,” Jesus told them. “No one who comes to me will ever be hungry, and no one who believes in me will ever be thirsty again.38For I have come down from heaven, not to do my own will, but the will of him who sent me.40For this is the will of my Father: that everyone who sees the Son and believes in him will have eternal life, and I will raise him up on the last day.”

That’s the focal point. And so, be careful, always needing the BIG and SPECTACULAR could be a path away.

Don’t get me wrong, Jesus can and will do the big/spectacular. Jesus meets people where they are, but he rarely does exactly what they want. Even here, Jesus is doing something amazing (giving eternal life), but it doesn't register for them.

And when he talks like this, we hear…

41Therefore the Jews started grumbling about him because he said, “I am the bread that came down from heaven.” 42They were saying, “Isn’t this Jesus the son of Joseph, whose father and mother we know? How can he now say, ‘I have come down from heaven’?”

We need to see “a little more.” You’re just a person from Galilee – we need something bigger/better

QUESTION – Am I beginning to need to see the next BIG/SPECTACULAR sign to keep my faith going? Or is Jesus being the true sent one from the Father, the one who executes God’s will perfectly, the one who gives his life for us? Is HE enough, or will I turn my way

We talk about “God-moments,” that was a “God-thing.” Part of that I love, part of that I want to be cautious about. God moments also = One foot in front of the other, prayed when it was hard, faithful in a difficult environment – those are God-things as well

God sent his one and only Son to them, that one and only Son is communicating to them, telling them how life is meant to be lived, he comes prepared to give His life for people (stand in their place), and then deliver them. That’s what they need, not the spectacular.

What’s sad? They didn’t have to turn away. But, turning away from Jesus means you’re doomed to seeking that next big thing, always searching but never really coming to the knowledge of the truth. This isn’t better, is it?  Which direction are you going/facing?

There’s something else to see. When they ask, and when they say

30“What sign, then, are you going to do so that we may see and believe you?” they asked. “What are you going to perform?

34Then they said, “Sir, give us this bread always.”

Perform the sign now, give us the bread always. Jesus had shown signs of promise when he did the miracle the first time.

Expectation. They were only hoping for the quick fix. Super-fast, easy delivery mechanism.

We do that. Our biggest impulse to pray is that.

solve my problem make my pain go away   make the hard, easytransform this idiot into a highly functioning human being by lunchtime

But when that doesn’t happen, does it tempt you to turn the other way.

This could take time. Don’t get me wrong, Jesus can still do immediate, but listen to the timetable on the mind of Jesus.

35“I am the bread of life,” Jesus told them. “No one who comes to me will ever be hungry, and no one who believes in me will ever be thirsty again.

37Everyone the Father gives me will come to me, and the one who comes to me I will never cast out.

39This is the will of him who sent me: that I should lose none of those he has given me but should raise them up on the last day.

40For this is the will of my Father: that everyone who sees the Son and believes in him will have eternal life, and I will raise him up on the last day.”

44No one can come to me unless the Father who sent me draws him, and I will raise him up on the last day.

47“Truly I tell you, anyone who believes has eternal life.

50This is the bread that comes down from heaven so that anyone may eat of it and not die.

51I am the living bread that came down from heaven. If anyone eats of this bread he will live forever.

54The one who eats my flesh and drinks my blood has eternal life, and I will raise him up on the last day,

58This is the bread that came down from heaven; it is not like the manna your ancestors ate—and they died. The one who eats this bread will live forever.”

Some things that God is doing will take a long-time to unfold. God does his best work over seasons, over a lifetime. God’s timeframe is an eternal one.

You want to see some improvement in the next 10 days. When we’ve been there 10,000 years.

Here’s a question…do you have to have the quick fix to keep my faith going? Or is Jesus’s promise to prepare us for judgment day significant, what about living forever (finances are stressful), what about eternal life (stuck in your job, family friction)? Is HE enough, or will I turn my way looking for something else

The truth is that a turn away from Jesus means they’ve doomed themselves to looking somewhere else for something that will never be found: perpetual, permanent satisfaction. But you don’t have to walk that path!  Which direction are you going/facing?

Transition – what prompts a defection [having to have the big/spectacular, needing the quick fix]. What else challenges – the way Jesus begins to talk

51I am the living bread that came down from heaven. If anyone eats of this bread he will live forever. The bread that I will give for the life of the world is my flesh.” 52At that, the Jews argued among themselves, “How can this man give us his flesh to eat?” 53So Jesus said to them, “Truly I tell you, unless you eat the flesh of the Son of Man and drink his blood, you do not have life in yourselves. 54The one who eats my flesh and drinks my blood has eternal life, and I will raise him up on the last day, 55because my flesh is true food and my blood is true drink. 56The one who eats my flesh and drinks my blood remains in me, and I in him.

Graphic imagery. Cannibalism/vampire [not our preschool VBS theme)? Once you get past that, you realize that Jesus expects us to be wholly his, not partially. We’re meant to SINK OUR TEETH into him.

That’s challenging if you mainly had looked at Jesus as a missing piece of your life puzzle.

Some of you know what it’s like to have that ONE piece. You keep waiting on finding it. When you do, you feel like things are complete.

His teaching helps you navigate life so much better.

We begin to thinking he’s the best mentor, guide, talking partner, positive energy, who gives you the space and helps you process all your options, dreams, hopes, wishes. He definitely can be that.

But, it’s so much more, isn’t it? he was always meant to be more. He’s our only spiritual food (sustenance, endurance, strength, energy and even enjoyment). Gives you the nutrition to activate your body, so it works the way it’s supposed to. Our life hinges on nutrition. So, spiritually, we are sinking our teeth into Jesus.

It’s easier to feel comfortable with a “faith journey,” a set of practices, some theology/teaching, life principles, code of conduct. Jesus says you have to be consumed with me.

Question:  Am I approaching Jesus as the HELP, as the small missing piece I needed to find, or am I consumed? Is he the person who means everything – on your darkest day, your worst nightmare, your greatest joy, your crowning achievement

Truly when you turn away from Jesus, you’re doomed to searching, and never being made whole. You can make a different choice today! Which direction are you going/facing?

Maybe you’ve seen something else. Jesus had been beating a drum. God is the giver. God is the initiator, God is the first-step taker.

32Jesus said to them, “Truly I tell you, Moses didn’t give you the bread from heaven, but my Father gives you the true bread from heaven.

37Everyone the Father gives me will come to me, and the one who comes to me I will never cast out.

39This is the will of him who sent me: that I should lose none of those he has given me but should raise them up on the last day.

44No one can come to me unless the Father who sent me draws him, and I will raise him up on the last day.

And toward the end of the teaching…

63The Spirit is the one who gives life. The flesh doesn’t help at all. The words that I have spoken to you are spirit and are life.

65He said, “This is why I told you that no one can come to me unless it is granted to him by the Father.”

Then sadly disciples walk away. Maybe the picture became really clear. I think we’re seeing another dynamic: when it comes to your relationship with God…do you feel the need to DO something to save yourself. Do you need/want SOME of the credit. Is there a mindset/desire of wanting to find something that says, “I did this” at least “I contributed”

Jesus is giving us a clear picture. That isn’t the way it’s going to work. It’s a shot to our pride.

Spiritual life is never self-generated. It’s a gift. No place to pat ourselves on the back.

Don’t get lost in age-old debates that are virtually unsolvable as to where God’s sovereign plan/will is, and where your choice starts. God acts first, and he always does what’s right, always does what’s good

When you turn away from Jesus, you’re actually setting on a course to have to constantly prove yourself. You could find all your purpose, meaning by a life that consciously lives for the glory of God: his honor, his praise, our worship, our gratitude. That’s the path you were meant to walk. Which direction are you going/facing?

Conclusion

We read verse 66, but let’s keep reading.

66From that moment many of his disciples turned back and no longer accompanied him. 67So Jesus said to the Twelve, “You don’t want to go away too, do you?” 68Simon Peter answered, “Lord, to whom will we go? You have the words of eternal life. 69We have come to believe and know that you are the Holy One of God.”

The Holy One of God –  who does wonders, who raises the dead, spiritually physically;  who is equal with the Father, our lives are placed in his hand

We’ve talked about some dark places. But, 11 disciples don’t go there.

I am positive that there were plenty of gaps in their understanding.

I am positive that it wasn’t always easy taking steps of self-denial in following Jesus. They had plenty of room to grow.

They stuck with Jesus, eleven stuck with him and saw every loving act, the brutal execution on the cross, the stunning resurrection, his authoritative commission to wait for him and make disciples, and his triumphant ascension.

They stuck with Jesus. They kept listening to his words. They trusted in Him. They kept walking. They kept being witnesses

And I can too. And you can too.

1. There’s a lot to think about. Homework of self-reflection. Traction? Maybe it’s a little scary. Someone you could talk to?

2. Maybe none of these specific things for you were the main paths away from Jesus, but maybe there is another one. Wouldn’t a conversation be helpful there.

3. Disciples followed in community. How many others are invested in your spiritual success?

<><><><><>

6.8.2025  Brainerd  (Sunday AM)