Progress ReportHARD SEASONSSelected Scriptures from Acts 4-9

INTRODUCTION – It’s a fact we really don’t think about too much: Our Messiah, our Lord was executed as a criminal.

Some powerful people didn’t find his message one of life, but believed he was a deceiver, a fraud, and dangerous. They believed that life would be better without him, his teaching and his guidance. And a crowd of people gathered together one day in opposition to the One we call Savior and Lord, and had him crucified.

That would just sit in a category of background information as one studies Christianity. It would sit there, if it were not for Jesus saying to us…

Matthew 5:11 – You are blessed when they insult you and persecute you and falsely say every kind of evil against you because of me.

John 15:18 – If the world hates you, understand that it hated me before it hated you.

Jn 16:33 – I have told you these things so that in me you may have peace. You will have suffering in this world. Be courageous! I have conquered the world.

If you are a Christian, if your life is wrapped up in Christ,  life will be hard…

often because we’re human – human body, groaning, weakness, wasting away

because you and I have sinned and you and I still sin

on occasion because of who you have aligned yourself with (Jesus as Lord and Messiah)

Jesus told us this because He wanted us to be prepared. It could be wise and helpful for us to walk through a few chapters in Acts

see opposition for what it is,  see response of first believerssee progress of the church Jesus continues to build

WHAT ACTS DESCRIBES – Most people recognize Acts 4-9 as especially intense when it comes to the church being persecuted. It’s most helpful if you see it for yourself.

CHAPTER 4

4:1-2 – confrontation of Peter/John (by priests, captain of temple police, Sadducees) and in 4:2 – Peter/John and likely Apostles and their teaching viewed as an annoyance especially due to the teaching of Resurrection (priests, captain of temple police, Sadducees)

4:3 – Peter and John seized and taken into custody and in 4:7 – Peter and John questioned by rulers, elders, scribes + High Priest and family

4:17-18, 21 – threats/orders to Peter/John from Sanhedrin

We’re reading of people being annoyed by the apostles, and so there is hassle and there are threats. Not because of cultural stands. Because of preaching Jesus in a world that would like to think of Jesus sometimes as mostly irrelevant and inconsequential.

ACTS 55:17 – jealousy of apostles/disciples (high priest + administration, Sadducees) and in 5:18 – apostles arrested, jailed by high priest + administration, Sadducees

5:33 – enraged, ready to kill Peter and the apostles after his message (high priest + administration, Sanhedrin)

5:40 – apostles physically punished (flogged), orders not to speak (by the Sanhedrin)

These are added wrinkles: jealousy. Not because of any misbehavior. Now they are enraged (cut to the heart). Jesus seems to be getting in the way of their project. This message of Jesus is functioning like a buzzsaw. And so there is physical harm done.

ACTS 66:9 – opposition to Stephen from synagogue + arguments (different place; Freedmen’s Synagogue, Cyrenians, Alexandrians, Cilicia, Asia)

6:11-13 – plots to use lies and misinformation to discredit Stephen leads to seizure and arrest and trial before Sanhedrin (mob, elders, scribes)

Again people are cut to the heart, a mob scene starts.

Stephen defends himself (preaches the gospel) in ACTS 77:54 – enraged, physically agitated at Stephen his message (Sanhedrin and mob) and in 7:57-58 – mob scene that ends with Stephen being stoned

CHAPTER 88:1 – high level approval (Saul) + severe persecution that causes major scattering and migration. In 8:3 – powerful person leading destructive house-to-house pursuit of believers [men/women, not just leaders], leading to incarceration

CHAPTER 99:1 – powerful person(Saul) consumed with leading organized threats and plans of murderous violence against any disciples. In 9:2 he’s leading a widened pursuit for extradition and incarceration [men/women, not just leaders]

These are the beginnings of the church. An executed Messiah. Followers of that Messiah hassled and hunted, tormented and even executed

What does that mean for us? I want to be WIDE-EYED, CLEAR-EYED ABOUT where we are today. This feels tough because I’ve experienced so little of what we’ve read. The reach and effects of the gospel in our country, and the legal systems we’re blessed with. So, there’s a hesitancy to compare anything

at the same time, this didn’t happen on Mars with Martians

at the same time, followers of Jesus Christ could face some level of opposition even in the deep religious South

at the same time, followers of Jesus all over the world face some of these exact tactics and outcomes all around the world

Let’s try to process it well, try to name some things, brace ourselves, live in a bigger world than just what’s the latest show to drop on Netflix, or who signed for how much NIL money, or is everything on sale for 30% or 40% at Hobby Lobby this week. I see some escalating layers.

Low-level, initial condemnation and distance – I am thinking of isolation that might happen by friends, family, spouse, parent, child/classmates

the fact that church/Jesus means so much is just frustrating (your time, your money), what you do, what you avoid, who you associate with, whose opinion matters very little, how you befriend people who need it

people who have some form of “religion” are baffled that yours makes you act in that way, maybe people find it convicting

Targeting and tracking – Treated as a nuisance and hassled (teacher, professor, boss, manager, HR director)

called out, reported, made an example of, told to comply

Life made more and more uncomfortable, dead ends

ceiling on how far you can go, advance (tenure)marriage ending; Life gets rearranged

Many places in this world, your ID card (driver’s license) comes with a religious marker, many of those places, it’s illegal to change that to Christianity

Countries refusing entry to missionaries – often the better they do their job, the more likely that will stir up opposition

__________

Incarceration, physical punishmentIntentional violent pursuit of death

This is just a sobering discussion, and yet at the end of this awful section of Scripture is a Progress Report.

Acts 9:31 – So the church throughout all Judea, Galilee, and Samaria had peace and was strengthened. Living in the fear of the Lord and encouraged by the Holy Spirit, it increased in numbers.

It’s compelling, even though we’re not guaranteed it goes like that. This is not the story of defeat but advance. How did that happen?

Where I kept going as I read and re-read these chapters is à are there things I should be picking up? Things that may be transferrable, things that characterized them, prepared them, defined who they are, who they would be. We don’t live where some of these chapters go. But, still are there similarities.

They had a set of UNMOVABLE CONVICTIONS. The convictions get stronger. They just don’t change.

They don’t take steps back from a crucified, resurrected, reigning Jesus who would exercise judgment over the whole world. They don’t compromise, they don’t lose sight of who Jesus is or the sovereignty of God in directing and defeating every plan against them.

Listen in Acts 4

4:12 There is salvation in no one else, for there is no other name under heaven given to people by which we must be saved.”

4:19–20 Peter and John answered them, “Whether it’s right in the sight of God for us to listen to you rather than to God, you decide; for we are unable to stop speaking about what we have seen and heard.”

Listen to the conviction in Acts 5

29 – Peter and the apostles replied, “We must obey God rather than people.

5:40–41 After they called in the apostles and had them flogged, they ordered them not to speak in the name of Jesus and released them. Then they went out from the presence of the Sanhedrin, rejoicing that they were counted worthy to be treated shamefully on behalf of the Name.

Those convictions go really deep. Where does that come from?

4:13 – When they [those who opposed the Apostles] observed the boldness of Peter and John and realized that they were uneducated and untrained men, they were amazed and recognized that they had been with Jesus.

Unmovable convictions are strong because they love Jesus.

This is not because someone is trying to be cantankerous, difficult; not because they’re an idealogue, and it’s not because we think people are stupid.

We owe our lives to Jesus. We see our need for Jesus. We depend on Jesus. We think this is best for the world

degree of dependence on Jesus as Messiah and Lorddeep love for himdeep conviction of how good life is when it’s in his hands

He really does mean everything to them; nothing in this world would move them to be unfaithful to him. Does it work like that for you?

The COMMUNITY BECOMES THICK

There’s not a veneer of being together, but no internal bond, nothing tight, nothing meaningful.

4:23–24 After they were released, they went to their own people and reported everything the chief priests and the elders had said to them. When they heard this, they raised their voices together to God…

Acts 4:32, 34-35  Now the entire group of those who believed were of one heart and mind, and no one claimed that any of his possessions was his own, but instead they held everything in common .For there was not a needy person among them because all those who owned lands or houses sold them, brought the proceeds of what was sold, and laid them at the apostles’ feet. This was then distributed to each person as any had need.

I want to beat the drum again. This wasn’t a clique or a club. It was brought together by Jesus. That is what thickens the relationship. It isn’t good intentions. It’s the work of Father, Son, Spirit bringing them together.

When I think of thick community, several things come to mind –

First: challenge this is to our consumer culture (especially when it comes to church.

Praying together, stewarding resources together, taking care of each other together. Sense of responsibility.

That is thick community (even if it wasn’t perfect). What does thin look like?

Is it based on a few preferences, few programsIs it merely scratching a religious itchWhere does it rank on the priority, how easy would it be to walk awayWhen the battering ram of life comes, would it sustain you?

If it’s virtually non-existent, or primarily self-serving, what could it look like in a year, or 2, or 5. What would be a start so that you have people I belong to; people I intend on doing life with.

Second my mind went to those who might have had experience where you’ve been hurt, burned by church —> don’t settle for “less than.” This may very well be hard. It will just take time to heal, resettle, grow deep relationships. Don’t settle for something thin!

Third, a word about solidarity and sensitivity. For all of our ability to keep up what’s going on in the world [trade wars, spats with leadership, global stock markets, Olympics, world cup, tennis, golf.

What does Jesus’ kingdom look like there, how are my brothers/sisters there? How can I be praying?

Ones we’ve sent – what would be a start

If there’s another major takeaway from these chapters it’s that the WITNESS OF THE DISCIPLES BECOMES BOLDER AND BROADER.

4:31– When they had prayed, the place where they were assembled was shaken, and they were all filled with the Holy Spirit and began to speak the word of God boldly.

They are still talking about God’s Word, believer are still added

5:14 – Believers were added to the Lord in increasing numbers—multitudes of both men and women.

They don’t pull back – temple/homes. So convinced that this is indeed good news. What was meant to snuff out something actually acts as lighter fluid

5:42 – Every day in the temple, and in various homes, they continued teaching and proclaiming the good news that Jesus is the Messiah.

First martyr dies with the words of Jesus on his lips, and a glimpse of Jesus in his view. When things get very tough after Stephen, they do scatter, but they go to harder places where there’s more complexity (Samaria)

8:4 – So those who were scattered went on their way preaching the word.

What happens when the gospel comes?

8:8 – There was great joy in that city.

Philip keeps preaching

8:25 – After they had testified and spoken the word of the Lord, they traveled back to Jerusalem, preaching the gospel in many villages of the Samaritans.

Spiritually-searching Ethiopian is led to faith, and Philip continues

8:40 – Philip appeared in Azotus, and he was traveling and preaching the gospel in all the towns until he came to Caesarea.

In a beautifully ironic twist, Saul the Christian-hating, fanatical terrorist is converted. What does he do?

9:20 – Immediately he began proclaiming Jesus in the synagogues: “He is the Son of God.”

9:28 – Saul was coming and going with them in Jerusalem, speaking boldly in the name of the Lord.

No backpedaling. They stay on their front foot.

<><><><><>

2.2.2025  Brainerd  (Sunday AM)