ARE YOU IN?KINGMAKERS, CHAOS & FOOD CHASERSJOHN 6:14-29

TITLE SLIDE

Three. I can think of 3 distinct times I’ve been near a mob. Mobs can be so unpredictable. I don’t have pleasant memories of any of those days. I was trying to mind my own business. I just wanted out as quick as possible.

Everything turned out okay for me, but a mob scene is where our story begins. Jesus has just done what everyone knew can’t be done. He miraculously fed thousands of people with virtually nothing, and there were lots of leftovers. And the crowd is full throttle.

READ John 6:14-29 then back to title slide

This portion of John tells the story of people on the hunt for Jesus. I am going to break it up into a couple of categories.

It starts with KING-MAKERS who are prepared to use force if needed to appoint Jesus as their king.It ends with FOOD-CHASERS who know a good food set-up when they see it, and so they track Jesus down (“we’re hungry, give us more”)

In the middle is a scene of chaos on the sea of Galilee. There it’s not so much that people go looking for Jesus, but it’s that Jesus comes to terrified disciples.

Let’s do this, let’s spend some time first with the king-makers and the food chasers, and then we’ll come back to the terrified disciples.

15Therefore, when Jesus realized that they were about to come and take him by force to make him king, he withdrew again to the mountain by himself.

So, the KING MAKERS. What’s the mindset here? It is understandable: “We’ve dealt with a foreign power controlling us long enough. We need someone to lead the charge and get us out of that mess.” Jesus has just done the unexplainable. He has provided mysteriously for thousands of people. It’s go time (Passover). “We were set free from Egypt one time, now let’s be set free from Rome.”

What exactly is wrong with this? Why does Jesus respond in the way he does? Isn’t Jesus the King, and isn’t he supposed to be our king? There is an issue of timing, but there’s more.

The kingdom of Jesus is not of this world. He is setting up a different kind of kingdom. We know this because when his life was on the line, he said so.

18:33 Pilate summoned Jesus, and said to him, “Are you the king of the Jews?”

18:36 “My kingdom is not of this world,” said Jesus. “If my kingdom were of this world, my servants would fight, so that I wouldn’t be handed over to the Jews. But as it is, my kingdom is not from here.”

John will write about this king once more in Revelation after he has a vision of Jesus – King of kings and Lord of Lords. But, it’s a different kingdom.

We want to “MAKE” a king, because that gives us some measure of control over the king.  These aren’t pure evil, selfish people, but it’s important to look at this realistically.

We grow to some level of maturity. We realize we don’t control the world. But what if we could appoint someone who actually can run the world. The king we can make – we serve you, but you owe a lot to us, so you actually serve our purposes. We’ll do what you want, but we need you to come through for us when we spell out what we want.

Before we load an app or an update, there are these terms of agreement. You’re probably signing your life away. We’ll choose you to be our king, but we want to be in control of the terms of the agreement.

We’re often willing to give up some control, freedom, but we retain ultimate decision-making, priorities, relationship assessment, lifestyle choices, it becomes very hard to see Jesus as King over these.

QUESTION: Is that the mental arrangement you have with Jesus? It just doesn't work that way.  Jesus is not going to be used in that way.

The kingdom of Jesus includes so many counter cultural things – strength comes through weakness, great people are servants of everyone, the path to freedom is denying yourself. The purpose of life isn’t to be good enough, but live in a loving relationship with God and with our neighbors.

WHO they are looking for doesn't need to change! It’s not like they should depend on another king. WHAT they really want out of the relationship is what needs to change

Helpful corrective for us would be the Lord’s Prayer: The kingdom of Jesus is something we receive rather than something we create (let earth receive her king). So, we line up life under him. Yoke is easy. Burden is light. Your kingdom come.

Jesus withdraws from the mob. We’ve met the KING-MAKERS But the people aren’t finished. Let’s take a closer look at the BREAD-CHASERS

23Some boats from Tiberias came near the place where they had eaten the bread after the Lord had given thanks. 24When the crowd saw that neither Jesus nor his disciples were there, they got into the boats and went to Capernaum looking for Jesus. 25When they found him on the other side of the sea, they said to him, “Rabbi, when did you get here?” 26Jesus answered, “Truly I tell you, you are looking for me, not because you saw the signs, but because you ate the loaves and were filled.

Jesus calls them out: you have the mindset of “give us bread on demand and do it on repeat.” Interesting though…Jesus’ answer to the bread-chasers is never “GO AWAY.” Jesus doesn't drive people away.

He also isn’t trying to build a coalition of people interested in him for a variety of reasons.

He will focus clearly on what matters.  You are chasing the wrong thing.

27Don’t work for the food that perishes but for the food that lasts for eternal life, which the Son of Man will give you, because God the Father has set his seal of approval on him.”

We all have some bread-seeker tendencies. We work really hard for stuff that will “perish.”

Bread = toys, status symbols, luxury items, lifestyle

stress we feel because we just don’t ever seem to have enough – housing, school decisions, retirement decisions, emergencies, medical procedures, student loans, major purchases, living on the edge

This bread-seeking drives fears, anxieties. And so, if there’s a potentially helpful solution, it gets our attention. And Jesus sees through this.

Jesus says hold on a minute. This constant pursuit of “bread” isn’t healthy for your soul. You weren’t made to live permanently on the chase for things like this. You need something steady, stabilizing.

You were made to trust. What you really want deep down is something that will sustain you for eternity (what a different time table).

There’s food that will help you with hunger pains right now. You stress eat, get some calories, and you’re on your way.

Eternal things. So rich, deep, sustaining that they will matter 1000 years from now.

That’s what I can give. I’ve been invested with the authority as the Son of Man to do that (significant title). I have been commissioned to bring you the food that will last forever. That’s what you should be working for. (27)

This crowd wasn’t quick to connect all the dots (we have that streak in us too): You tell us what we need to do and we’ll get to work. Give us the rundown on how we can work. (28) Walk us through this, step by step.

time given toward serving the needy, money given to charitable causesRest and observe Sabbath, a set of practices we need to meticulously follow that shows we’re serious. What do we need to do?

Here’s work —> Just believe (29). Jesus knows out of that faith is going to spring a thousand good things. Just rely on me.

It is about a relationship. Jesus redirects the pursuit of bread into pursuit of a relationship. Jesus is doing some heart surgery: God’s provision for you is not about a bread transaction, it’s about communion.

God is a good God, and he feeds the world every single day.

But, this is again where I think the Lord’s Prayer is helpful to correct and refocus. We DO pray, “give us our daily bread,” but we say that in reference to a relationship (we’ve already prayed OUR father, your kingdom, your will, your name). We’re asking for covenant grace, a relationship with a Father, and his care and provision for us builds that relationship.

Psalm 111:5 He has provided food for those who fear him;

Matthew 6:8 your Father knows the things you need before you ask him.

Matthew 7:11 If you then, who are evil, know how to give good gifts to your children, how much more will your Father in heaven give good things to those who ask him.

I don’t have to spend every waking moment chasing something down. What if I saw him as my willing provider? Not arm-twisting, chase him down (to get a signature on something – I hate to bother you again] but ready to make sure I don’t go hungry.

Where are you on this? Is the relationship side of things growing, and the transactional side decreasing? Are you self-consciously depending on Jesus more and more? Do you come to the end of yourself more quickly? Do you see the growth

Intentionally sandwiched in between the king-makers and bread chasers, is this scene of Galilee chaos. Remember, Jesus withdrew from the crowd who was about to be forceful, maybe even violent.

16When evening came, his disciples went down to the sea,17got into a boat, and started across the sea to Capernaum. Darkness had already set in, but Jesus had not yet come to them. 18A high wind arose, and the sea began to churn. 19After they had rowed about three or four miles, they saw Jesus walking on the sea.

Something you should realize…This is just part of life on the Sea of Galilee. It doesn't really work any other way. You can’t avoid challenges and scary situations like this.

Darkness, deadly winds, in the middle of the sea. For these disciples (who had spent a lot of time on the sea of Galilee), life pre-Jesus would’ve had these moments.

Life with Jesus had these moments. Helps us with the “why are these things happening to me?” It isn’t easy to hear but in truth, a lot of times the answer is “they happen to lots of people all the time.” You didn’t necessarily didn’t do something wrong.

Other passages will elaborate on this night in more detail, but you can sense the pressure. There’s the potential to be deadly. It’s hard to process what you need to do next. some people are first responders. Training, something in them helps them know what to do when they come on the scene. For the rest of us, it’s pretty easy to be upside-down.

Situations that are so chaotic, you’re doing your best (or maybe you aren’t). It’s a little too easy to just think, “Get your act together.”

He was coming near the boat, and they were afraid. 20But he said to them, “It is I. Don’t be afraid.” 21Then they were willing to take him on board, and at once the boat was at the shore where they were heading.

God shows mercy through the PRESENCE of Jesus: Jesus shows up

His presence communicates volumes here. You matter to me. You never were out of my care. Although you couldn’t see me or experience my presence. I knew exactly where you were every second of this entire ordeal.

You are ultimately safe. There are circumstances that can wreak a lot of havoc. But you are mine. You will get to where I am taking you.

Do you know that presence? It’s life-changing isn’t it.

Mercy through the WORDS of Jesus:– what he doesn’t say

…you’re acting like a bunch of sissies…you have experience with this (+ the law of averages says…)…I’ve looked at the Weather app, and it looks like it will blow over in about 15 more minutes

What he says: Don’t be afraid. It’s me. The power of who Jesus is.

Here – I might not be the first one to point this out to you, but if you’ve never seen it, you need to, and you never need to forget it.

εγω ειμι– in John 6:20 (3 words in English, 2 in Greek)

John 4:26 – Jesus told her, “I, the one speaking to you, am he.”

We try to fill in some extra words to make it a sentence. But very simply it is I AM. Holy name of God, given in one of the key pivot points of world history, not to mention our faith.

Exodus 3:14-15  – 14God replied to Moses, “I AM WHO I AM. This is what you are to say to the Israelites: I AM has sent me to you.”  15God also said to Moses, “Say this to the Israelites: The Lord, the God of your ancestors, the God of Abraham, the God of Isaac, and the God of Jacob, has sent me to you. This is my name forever; this is how I am to be remembered in every generation.

I Am in the book of John. We get hints in a few passages, but it becomes very clear in other parts of Jesus’ teaching.

6:35 “I am the bread of life,”         11:25 “I am the resurrection/life.8:12 “I am the light of the world.     14:6 “I am the way, truth, life.10:9 I am the gate.                    15:1 “I am the true vine. 10:11 “I am the good shepherd.

Jesus speaks I AM to a crew of terrified disciples. He’s there. Don't be afraid. Please come aboard. We want you here with us. And they get to where they are supposed to be going.

CONCLUSION

Sometimes, we’re looking to Jesus as a means to an end (our life is out of whack, our stress level is high because we know how much it takes to live), and we come to Jesus as mainly a bailout or for a handout. You fix this, and accomplish what I want at the same time.  It may take 2 seconds or it may take 20 years, but eventually that runs out of gas, and Jesus has words for us.

Here’s the work you need to do – Simply believe. Your kingdom come.  Our Father, I need bread. Please take care of me. Father, give us what you know we need when we need it, and provide it in ways that make us trust you more deeply.

Sometimes, it’s not so much that we come to Jesus, but it’s more like the darkness sets in, the winds get so strong, and it seems like Jesus is nowhere to be found. But today, we experience his presence, we hear his voice: Don’t be afraid. I AM!

COMMUNION (8:30 service)

Jesus, just as scared disciples did 2000 years ago, we welcome you aboard. The closer the better. Thanks for not keeping a distance when we need your help so desperately.

We aren’t going to try to make you king or Lord. You don’t need our help in that department, but we receive you as our king.And you aren’t our vending machine, but we confess we need you. We don’t live by bread alone, but we need to hear every word coming out of your mouth. You’ve spoken, you’ve corrected, and you’ve come near. How much you must love us, Jesus. Amen

<><><><><>

5.25.2025    Brainerd  (Sunday AM)