ARE YOU IN?FATHER & SONJOHN 5:17-29

Title Slide   The Bible is a powerful book (sharp two edged sword, seed which can turn into a massive oak, water in the desert bringing life). But, the Bible also can be a complicated book to understand. Volume, timeline, sequence; ancient world and ancient practices, invisible realm

One of the deepest areas I’ve found is the relationship between Father, Son and Spirit. The Tri-Unity of God. Right in there with that is grasping the relationship of God the Father to God the Son.

I am not “judgy” on this, but I would probably guess a lot of us might struggle (even people who’ve been Christians a long time)

Here’s a piece of paper: give you 60 seconds or so, write things the Bible teaches about the relationship of God the Father/Son.

It doesn’t mean you’re not a Christian, but still the relationship that Jesus had with His father really mattered to him, and it should matter to us.

What if in paying closer attention to John 5 over the next 30 minutes or so, you could leave here having a better grip of who God is: Who God the Father is, who God the Son is, and how their relationship works, you actually know God better. What if you got a couple of insights into what their relationship means for you. That could really be valuable

There will always be a mysterious element (I’m okay with that); If you could know more and better of who God is, and go all “in” is that something you would want to do?

Our passage today didn’t occur in a vacuum. Jesus has done a miracle, but it was a Sabbath miracle (when these kinds of things weren’t supposed to happen). The only One allowed to work on the Sabbath is Almighty God. People are frustrated, controversy is stirred up, and what Jesus says has the effect of pouring gasoline on the fire. Not because he came to get everyone riled up, but because He’s come to bring in a kingdom.

Let’s see what he says

17Jesus responded to them, “My Father is still working, and I am working also.”

Father is working, Son is working. VISUAL (parallel lines): There is a joining for work. There is collaboration.

Work on the Sabbath – we know God rested from Creation, but there is the work of holding it all together, it’s not as if he gave it a good spin, and then just natural forces take over. Scripture never presents the God who is absent. He’s working.

Frustrating framing to people in that day, because Jesus was claiming

The Relationship of Father/Son is UNITY/EQUALITY

One layer below, there’s a deeper implication, The WAY Jesus speaks indicates something unique

Using “Father” in reference to God was rare

“MY” Father wasn’t ever heard of – almost always we have Jesus referring to God as Father, and here it’s so personal. We have the visible human Jesus referring to the invisible Almighty God saying “we’re related, he’s my Father, and he deeply loves me.”

The miracle you just saw, the one before that in Jn4, the conversation with the woman at the well before that, My Father and I are doing work

18This is why the Jews began trying all the more to kill him: Not only was he breaking the Sabbath, but he was even calling God his own Father, making himself equal to God.

They understand the bold claim: Father and I are distinct from each other, but equal (18). That was such an issue, because everyone at that time knew verses like these

Isaiah 42:8 8I am the Lord. That is my name, and I will not give my glory to another or my praise to idols.

Isaiah 44:6 6This is what the Lord, the King of Israel and its Redeemer, the Lord of Armies, says: I am the first and I am the last. There is no God but me.

Yet, Jesus was operating with the same power, in service to the same goal.

Anyone else says that, and they have problems: delusional, misguided, could be dangerous. The crowd seems to be operating with that – let’s shut him down, let’s charge him with blasphemy laws (which would include execution)

Relationship of Father/Son is Equality or Unity. It may be an awkward question, but where do you fit in? What does that mean for you?

Answer: If there is no relationship, and there is no working together, we might never know, have assurance that the invisible God is still at work

Has God moved on to other things from a world filled with arrogant bullies, manipulative abusers, defrauders, church-going gossips?

When a human, the God-man comes and does God-work for us to experience, here’s the result: We benefit. The collaboration is aimed at your benefit.  Every time Jesus does something we can be reminded that God still sees, cares, acts, loves, works

Wedding in Cana –  Wine at a wedding because the Father works and the Son works.Pool in Bethesda – There is a lame man walking because the Father works and the Son works.

Well in Samaria – There is a woman whose life is changed because the Father works and the Son works.

The same would be true at a church in Brainerd, business in Chattanooga, or a home in Ringgold/East Ridge.

Application: When we PRAY. We are working with the grain. We pray to the Father in the name of the Son, both are working.

So, both are working. There’s never an inkling that Jesus tried to clear up a misunderstanding, by saying what we would say, “NO, I don’t think I am God, NO I never claimed that.” But, he does give us insight.

19Jesus replied, “Truly I tell you, the Son is not able to do anything on his own, but only what he sees the Father doing. For whatever the Father does, the Son likewise does these things.

The Son is lining up under the Son (in the form of dependence)

Relationship of Son to Father is DEPENDENCE

The Son depends on the Father. He is not less in worth in any way. It’s not because he is less of a being (halfway god). He IS God. But as Jesus walks this earth, Scripture speaks of an order, of a dependence.

19 – The Son does EVERYTHING/WHATEVER his Father is doing (he sees all the initiatives and the Son gets to work) - not limited in any way

20For the Father loves the Son and shows him everything he is doing…

Nothing is hidden. The Son sees what the Father is doing, the Father shows him everything

Result: the Son is not independent contractor, not a freelancer, never going to be a time where the Father pulls a direction, and the son pulls the other (not the result I had in mind, but I guess we have to go with it), mixed messages from God the Father and God the Son

Where do WE fit in? How does that benefit us?

We benefit from the MODEL – Our relationship with Jesus, isn’t exactly the same as Jesus’ relationship with the Father, but Phil. 2 says we have this same mindset. We’ve seen perfect dependence (in the context of perfect love), and we are to depend on Him. Without Him we can do nothing

We don’t get wiped away as if our existence means nothing, but we completely rely on Jesus.

we do all things through Christ who gives us the strengthGod supplies all our need, according to the riches in JESUSHe has given us in Jesus everything we need to live a godly life

We benefit from more than the model: even greater things are in store (20), and we’re meant to be AMAZED. Amazed at what

As Jesus encounters human beings, there is an amazing goal for humanity. The Son is not excluded in anything, God is revealing his agenda day by day, person by person, challenge by challenge

The Father takes the dead (spiritually dead here) and gives them life (21). The Son gives life at his discretion.

21And just as the Father raises the dead and gives them life, so the Son also gives life to whom he wants.

The good news is that Father/Son have a saving/rescue agenda, that the Lord Jesus perfectly executes (no daylight between them in intention, will, heart, motivation).  As we are wrapped up in Jesus, we receive life.

Here we sit: not just sick, weakened, broken, messy – but dead (Eph 2 – in sins, faults, wrongs)

Jesus sees you there, loves you, and brings you to life. [My sheep, my disciples, my brothers/sisters]

Full circle – the Father initiates this kind of saving work (in eternity past), the Son isn’t a stranger to any of this, he has seen this rescue plan unfold from eternity past, and the Son depends completely on the Father and accomplishes every single aspect of it.

The Son does whatever it takes operating in complete dependence on the power of God the Father to give life to people. The Son is just not going to fail.

I think our worship will look different when we grasp that, our singing will look different. [all people honoring the Son]

Let’s keep going. The Son (Jesus) comes to earth, he is born, he walks, talks, eats, sleeps. A human being born in Bethlehem, who grew up in Nazareth, who traveled to Samaria and Jerusalem. Over the course of time, Jesus makes it clear that God has authorized him, and entrusted him with a couple of responsibilities

22 – The Father delegates judgment to the Son26 – The Father grants that the Son would be a source of life in Himself27 – The Father delegates the passing of judgment to the Son

Relationship of Father to Son is Delegation

Hearing “delegation” may come with some baggage (demeaning, less than). The Father entrusts and delegates activities, responsibilities to the Son. Are you really God if you don’t have control over…

Giving new life where there is none. Spiritual life, physical life, eternal life. Jesus is entrusted with this.

Executing final judgment – setting everything to rights, this is how it was meant to be. This is how it will be. Jesus is entrusted with this.

As Jesus perfectly depends on the Father, he actually makes it clear that both are his responsibilities, designated from God a part of his job description.

How fitting is this? How amazing is this? How encouraging is this. The one who will offer new life: Peter and Andrew, John and James; Mary Magdalene and Thomas, woman caught in adultery, Nicodemus, his mom, his sisters/brothers, soldiers and Pharisees. New Life!

Good news, he wasn’t finished with them. He’s still doing this today.

How clear is this? Final Judgment: the one who fed, loved, healed, forgave was also the one completely rejected, ignored, betrayed, crucified.

He will call all shots on eternity salvation, he will call the shots on eternal judgment/condemnation. Let’s be crystal clear: the intention of Jesus was never to bring condemnation, that was our default setting. We were already there. The intention was never to bring death, that’s the default setting. We already were there.

But Jesus comes with life. There’s always that moment when the teacher says, “this will be on the exam.” If you have 1 oz of situational awareness and responsibility you sit up and listen.

When Jesus speaks about authorization for giving life and for judging…

That paves a clear path – While having the authorization and responsibility to judge all humankind, he offers life

24“Truly I tell you, anyone who hears my word and believes him who sent me has eternal life, will not come under judgment but has passed from death to life.

Not just picking up on his vibe, but responding to the WORD/message [facts, propositions, interpretations, conclusions]. Believing him who sent me. People who can accept an almighty being/force, but find themselves very neutral or unable to accept these kinds of claims about Jesus

seems other worldly, seems too specific, too pronounced, too exclusive – HIM, not any other way

Results: possessing eternal life, means no judgment, transfer from state and prospects of death to state and prospects of life

25“Truly I tell you, an hour is coming, and is now here, when the dead will hear the voice of the Son of God, and those who hear will live.

This is pre-resurrection. The dead hear the voice, they hear and they live

28Do not be amazed at this, because a time is coming when all who are in the graves will hear his voice  29and come out—those who have done good things, to the resurrection of life, but those who have done wicked things, to the resurrection of condemnation.

In the graves, physically dead, they hear the voice and come out

29 – those who have a good record.  How is that possible (being in Christ, having the Spirit which produces new fruit)

29 – those doing wicked things, condemnation in store

if there is none righteous, if even our good deeds have been tainted, if we are all affected by a disease called sin

if there is no honoring of Jesus; find that not very compellingif there is a disregarding of his voice; life on your own termsif there is unbelief in God who sent Jesus; choose your own path

End result: condemnation. We started our time together maybe with some things in our mind, but a blank page. And now it becomes serious.

Conclusion: Almost 30 years ago when I made a trip from Augusta, GA to central Pennsylvania. Shawna and I had been dating seriously, but I had never seen where she lived.

House she grew up. Saw her grandparents’ house. School, church. I understood her better, our relationship deeper because I had new insight.

Taking this trip through John 5 might have the same effect [ARE YOU IN]

the prayers you pray to the Father in the name of the Son might be 25% more personal

The praises you sing to the Son. The awareness of the work of Jesus (and the work of the Father) might be more real to you

Just as critical, the Jesus who had almost been the ancient celebrity that gets celebrated at C/E now is seen as your judge, and in your dead condition, you hear his voice speaking, offering you life, a window to respond: hear, obey, believe, honor who he is and what he’s done, and you devote yourself to Him.

<><><><><>

5.4.2025  Brainerd  (Sunday AM)