ARE YOU IN?PEOPLE WHO SHOULD GET ITJOHN 7:1-24

TITLE SLIDE

In the book of John, we have something that we don’t get in every single book of the Bible. John tells us the reason he put all these words together. Do you remember why John wrote this book?

John 20:30–31 30Jesus performed many other signs in the presence of his disciples that are not written in this book. 31But these are written so that you may believe that Jesus is the Messiah, the Son of God, and that by believing you may have life in his name.

John wrote everything so that people would believe and have life in Jesus. Several ways you can get at that

1. You can give episode after episode (teaching, miracles, personal interactions) so people can evaluate. Who is this? And believe.

2. You can help interpret what is happening. You can explain, share background, conclusions. What is going on? And believe.

3. You can show how people approached Jesus, and what approaching Jesus with belief and unbelief looks like. Where am I? We can see the difference, struggle, and let other people help to evaluate where we are.

That is what this portion of John masterfully does. Many walking away. Eleven very imperfect disciples who will end up sticking with Jesus and not walking away. There are a few more case studies in this section

Actually today we’re going to see some people who should’ve been a “lock” to follow Jesus, they should get it, and be in on what Jesus is doing. The first is Family – brothers and sisters (other kids of Joseph/Mary)

1After this, Jesus traveled in Galilee, since he did not want to travel in Judea because the Jews were trying to kill him.

This is picking up on chapter 5

2The Jewish Festival of Shelters was near. 3So his brothers said to him, “Leave here and go to Judea so that your disciples can see your works that you are doing. 4For no one does anything in secret while he’s seeking public recognition. If you do these things, show yourself to the world.”

They aren’t wrong. Galilee was kind of “hick-ville.” Anyone who wants to show the world what they have, Broadway, Nashville, Hollywood: you have to pay your dues, but eventually if you want to get on people’s radar, you’ll have to make a move like this. Jesus that’s a good plan.

Just looking at the surface, we would’ve said they’re believing in Jesus. But that’s not what verse 5 says.

5(For not even his brothers believed in him.)

Do the words “even they didn’t believe” surprise you? They were so close to everything, and yet Scripture lets us know there’s a problem.

What’s going on?

They're impressed by Jesus. They want Jesus to get more attention and recognition. They want to be evangelists to make sure people see what Jesus can do.

I don't think it's reading too much into this to wonder if somehow they saw public recognition of Jesus could work to their advantage. Proximity, success, everyone likes being around a winner.

So, they come to Jesus with their travel itinerary for him.

Jesus doesn’t do what they expect. Timing and big picture things aren’t our strong-suits.

6Jesus told them, “My time has not yet arrived, but your time is always at hand.

Jesus knew that he could leverage the popularity, escalate a movement, take advantage of the buzz around him. But, the Father had another plan so Jesus had different priorities.

He is saying, “The kind of priorities you have, people always are pursuing.”

7The world cannot hate you, but it does hate me because I testify about it—that its works are evil.

Jesus had this complicated relationship with the world. Complicated because of our sin and his deep love for us. God loves the world, the world hates Jesus. Jesus came into this world to save the world.

8Go up to the festival yourselves. I’m not going up to this festival, because my time has not yet fully come.” 9After he had said these things, he stayed in Galilee. 10After his brothers had gone up to the festival, then he also went up, not openly but secretly.

When he actually arrives in Jerusalem he is talking about the heart of the Father, not doing stunts. Going to Judea/Jerusalem wasn’t so much about the City of David, Temple, but on his radar would be events that happened Gethsemane and Golgotha

Zoom out for a second and actually think about our lives, our walk. We should be pretty cautious.

What could unbelief look like? Is there any part that is saying, “Jesus, I’ve got the perfect plan for you.” That could be a symptom of unbelief

Sorting through some of my informal prayers – just get this worked out in a way where I don’t lose a lot of money, don’t get my heart broken, get me better, open doors for me. They’re all fine to pray. But what happens when the timetable and the big picture doesn’t work like I expected.

We should learn: Believing Jesus can do ___________, does NOT necessarily mean you believe IN him.  It doesn’t mean you’re trusting Him with your future, your life, your present.

Even his brothers did not believe. My guess is that we all come with imperfect faith, so this really challenges. Where does our faith need to grow? Where is following Jesus more about me and what I think would be best, and less about him and his timing.

We have Jesus in Jerusalem, but he doesn’t make the public entry there. What comes next

11The Jews were looking for him at the festival and saying, “Where is he?” 12And there was a lot of murmuring about him among the crowds. Some were saying, “He’s a good man.” Others were saying, “No, on the contrary, he’s deceiving the people.”

Kids can you imagine hearing Jesus teaching, and asking your parents about him? Your parents think he’s a really good man, but your best friend’s parents think he’s making stuff up.

13Still, nobody was talking publicly about him for fear of the Jews.

Everybody is keeping things on the down-low.

14When the festival was already half over, Jesus went up into the temple and began to teach. 15Then the Jews were amazed and said, “How is this man so learned, since he hasn’t been trained?”

I want you to see another group who should’ve been a lock to get what Jesus was saying.

I think the reference to the “Jews” who are commenting here are  people who have serious religious practices – people who know the law, keep the Sabbath, make sure their sons have the sign of the covenant, go to Jerusalem for festivals. In everything that is a regular part of their life, Jesus will teach and point to Himself.

Really impressed by how smart, how capable Jesus is of teaching, body of knowledge He’s mastered.

Someone gives a really good talk – that didn’t disappoint (you had heard about them, and now you see them live). They know their stuff.

Jesus gets their attention – Looking for him (11), murmuring about him (12), amazed by him (15)

How is this man so learned? Jesus didn’t come to merely impress, maintain status quo. Everyone’s on the right path, you do you, believe in yourself, trust your gut.

16Jesus answered them, “My teaching isn’t mine but is from the one who sent me.

If Jesus said, “thanks.” Or, “you liked that, did you” or “there’s more where that came from,” this story looks different.

But Jesus is so humble, and so focused. Jesus teaches with authority because He has been commissioned by God to fulfill what God had always promised to do. Because that is his mission he confronts and disrupts.

There’s a resistance that will play out. The world hated Jesus, people were trying to kill him. If I set aside the most violent people, and really try to understand the resistance, I find it isn’t that complicated.

They didn’t believe because they wouldn’t accept the disruption. Jesus disrupts. He changes things. He changes everything. The decade before there were plenty of Feast of Shelters. They all went off without a hitch. Then Jesus comes, and presses in. People are divided!

He brings confronting questions to the festival!

Do you really want to do what God wants you to do? (17) – if you really did, you would be tracking with me

Are you really seeking God’s glory above everything else? (18) – if you did, it would be evident like it is in my life

Maybe they just want to get back to law-keeping and Sabbath observance.

Are you really following the instruction the Lord gave at Sinai? (19) – you really don’t keep the law

Do you really understand the heart of things like Sabbath and circumcision? (23-24) – you’re really stuck on outward appearances

With every question or statement, he is disrupting things.

Maybe there is something similar that Jesus has done with you. Is there any part that is resisting his disruption into your life – into what “seems” to be working for you?  You have your life, friends, goals, fun, money, career, comfort, status.

Jesus brings collisions.

priorities, values, ambitions, what you think about, things taken away (you can grow)

sin patterns or idols of our heart (you can be transformed)

community (you were made for others)

what you think your life is all about, not so wrapped up in yourself (callings – you can find your purpose in Him)

It isn’t always easy when Jesus begins to change you, but it’s always good, for your good.

Maybe today is a day where you stop resisting the work of Jesus. You stop doing your best to shut him down, and you begin to embrace what He is doing and where he is taking you.

We’ve tried to dial in groups (family, the serious about their faith) that should’ve gotten it, but weren’t getting it. Helpful to evaluate, see ourselves accurately. We don’t want to be around Jesus, around his teaching, around his people, and miss the point. We don’t want our faith to be defective.

CONCLUSION

You need to know something. Some of these very brothers who didn’t get it then, would get it later. They moved from being impressed to being united with Jesus.

Acts 1:14 (Mary & Jesus’ brothers); 1 Cor 9:5 (brothers of the Lord)James 1:1 – a servant of God and of the Lord Jesus ChristJude 1 1Jude, a servant of Jesus Christ and a brother of James: To those who are the called, loved by God the Father and kept for Jesus Christ.

The Lord is so patient and kind. They once were unbelieving, but eventually they believed. There was hope for them. There’s hope for us, even if something has been exposed in us today. God knows how to draw very straight lines with very crooked sticks.

I also have to wonder if some in that crowd who were opposing Jesus at the Feast of Shelters might later be in Jerusalem for Passover and see the crucifixion, or maybe they would be there for Pentecost, and put some things together. I wonder how many put their faith in Jesus and walked with Him, even if originally their faith was defective.

Here's what we all should know. In our own strength, we don’t get it. Our story would be one of unbelief, not faith. We need outside help. We can’t just pull ourselves together. You need a brand new heart. What will come so natural to you (and me) is...

asking "what's in it for me"

thinking "I'm doing as good as I can, as good as can be expected."

But God can change hearts, open eyes, pierce our stubbornness. Are you open to God doing work in your life.

Jesus comes and completely rewires us. This means we can hear him with hope today. He can help us.

17If anyone wants to do his will, he will know whether the teaching is from God or whether I am speaking on my own.

ANYONE – that could be me/you. What if God gives you a new heart and you actually WANT to do what God wants – inside track of processing what Jesus is saying. Does every part of you want what he wants? Is that increasing?

18The one who speaks on his own seeks his own glory; but he [JESUS] who seeks the glory of the one who sent him is true, and there is no unrighteousness in him.

Jesus is true. We can trust him, and when we follow Him, our lives are also bringing God glory. What an awesome word for us!

Today you can have your heart totally rewired.

We love your voice the most (not just hearing our own), our heart wants your glory the most (not just needing to always be the big deal), We love your timing (even when it doesn’t match ours).

Father you be glorified, not me. You might be praying that for the 1st time or the 10,000th time.

And God by His grace is doing just that.

<><><><><>

6.15.2025    Brainerd  (Sunday AM)