BEHIND THE SCENES THE GREAT REVERSAL ESTHER 7-8

INTRODUCTION: Why do you think the book of Esther is in the Bible? Of course, yes, because God wanted it there, but what is it’s place?

Esther doesn’t take place in the Promised Land, doesn’t have prayer, worship in the temple, instruction from the Torah. The main characters haven’t explicitly devoted their lives to the Lord. It doesn’t even mention God’s name.

All true, but Esther helps us see the invisible God. (SERIES) Through what some might call “coincidences,” God works. God advances Esther. God protects Esther and Mordecai and the Jews from Haman’s evil intentions.

We’ve read and studied up to chapter 6. We begin to breathe easier, Esther has advanced to a place where she can protect her people. But chapter 7 gives us what I believe is one of the primary reasons we have Esther. And that is Esther doesn’t just give us a picture of relief or protection, Esther gives us an unmistakable picture of REVERSAL!

Reversal = dramatic change in direction, where the tables are turned

I saw a pretty dramatic reversal a few weeks ago. I was watching soccer: Argentina/Switzerland. There was this play, a Swiss player went down hard, and they gave a yellow card to an Argentinian for tripping him. But, then when they showed replay, the Swiss player had intentionally faked the whole thing. The Argentinian hadn’t even touched him. And so after the VAR, they totally reversed the call, gave a yellow card to the Swiss player, and it was his 2nd yellow card, so he ended up getting a red card, and dismissed from the game. The Swiss played with 10 players. In seconds, the whole feel of the game was reversed.

Reversals can be so dramatic, I want you to look at one in Esther, and then understand the role reversal could play in your life.

To appreciate the full aspects of this reversal, let’s start by imagining what it would be like to have Haman’s day in chapter 6

You went to sleep the night before advanced as you’ve ever been (or so you think). You just had an evening dining with the King and Queen.

Your morning starts early because you need to ask the king for a personal favor (to get an enemy named Mordecai out of your way)

You’re hustled into the king’s presence. The king asks you how you think he should pull out all the stops to honor someone. So, full of yourself that you think he’s thinking of you, you go for broke, shoot your shot, on what you’ve always hoped for, your dream scenario - one big city-wide parade honoring YOU.

You totally misjudged the situation. The king wasn’t thinking of you at all, but he does make you the grand marshal of the parade for the very person you were trying to eliminate, Mordecai.

At the end of the parade, you go home to sulk and pout. Then, you’re rushed away for another dinner with King and Queen, but not before your wife and your advisors verbalize that you’re in trouble.

What a day. We’re ready for the reversals of Esther 7

1The king and Haman came to feast with Esther the queen. 2Once again, on the second day while drinking wine, the king asked Esther, “Queen Esther, whatever you ask will be given to you. Whatever you seek, even to half the kingdom, will be done.” 3Queen Esther answered, “If I have found favor with you, Your Majesty, and if the king is pleased, spare my life; this is my request. And spare my people; this is my desire.

4For my people and I have been sold to destruction, death, and annihilation. If we had merely been sold as male and female slaves, I would have kept silent. Indeed, the trouble wouldn’t be worth burdening the king.” 5King Ahasuerus spoke up and asked Queen Esther, “Who is this, and where is the one who would devise such a scheme?” 6Esther answered, “The adversary and enemy is this evil Haman.” Haman stood terrified before the king and queen.

7The king arose in anger and went from where they were drinking wine to the palace garden. Haman remained to beg Queen Esther for his life because he realized the king was planning something terrible for him. 8Just as the king returned from the palace garden to the banquet hall, Haman was falling on the couch where Esther was reclining. The king exclaimed, “Would he actually violate the queen while I am in the house?” As soon as the statement left the king’s mouth, they covered Haman’s face.

9Harbona, one of the king’s eunuchs, said, “There is a gallows seventy-five feet tall at Haman’s house that he made for Mordecai, who gave the report that saved the king.” The king said, “Hang him on it.” 10They hanged Haman on the gallows he had prepared for Mordecai. Then the king’s anger subsided.

Just think through the characters

How shrewd is Esther – Her timing, crafting the request (spare my life); she knows what she’s doing

How impressionable is the King – whoever is in his ear wins the day: advisors, Haman (a little signature), Esther (help because me and my whole race and family have been targeted)

How ruined is Haman – Esther surgically exposes him, Harbona poetically makes a suggestion to the king. Haman is done.

At this point in Esther, what are you sensing?

Probably RELIEF – the main threat is gone, anger subsides You also feel RETRIBUTION – Haman totally had it coming to him.

But Esther isn’t just about relief. It’s about a chain of reversals, dramatic changes in direction: for Haman, for the Jews, for their enemies, for Mordecai, for Esther.

Chapter 8 makes us appreciate how extensive the reversals are. You have a real sense it’s a kill or be killed world.

1That same day King Ahasuerus awarded Queen Esther the estate of Haman, the enemy of the Jews. Mordecai entered the king’s presence because Esther had revealed her relationship to Mordecai. 2The king removed his signet ring he had recovered from Haman and gave it to Mordecai, and Esther put him in charge of Haman’s estate.

3Then Esther addressed the king again. She fell at his feet, wept, and begged him to revoke the evil of Haman the Agagite and his plot he had devised against the Jews. 4The king extended the gold scepter toward Esther, so she got up and stood before the king. 5She said, “If it pleases the king and I have found favor with him, if the matter seems right to the king and I am pleasing in his eyes, let a royal edict be written.

Let it revoke the documents the scheming Haman son of Hammedatha the Agagite wrote to destroy the Jews who are in all the king’s provinces. 6For how could I bear to see the disaster that would come on my people? How could I bear to see the destruction of my relatives?”

7King Ahasuerus said to Esther the queen and to Mordecai the Jew, “Look, I have given Haman’s estate to Esther, and he was hanged on the gallows because he attacked the Jews. 8Write in the king’s name whatever pleases you concerning the Jews, and seal it with the royal signet ring. A document written in the king’s name and sealed with the royal signet ring cannot be revoked.”

So many significant reversals (double reversals, not just Haman)

Estate of Haman removed and given to Queen Esther Access to the King (which Haman had) now opened to Mordecai Authoritative signet ring removed from Haman given to Mordecai Operation of Haman’s estate transferred to Mordecai One harmful edict revoked, one proactive edict instated

11-13 11The king’s edict gave the Jews in each and every city the right to assemble and defend themselves, to destroy, kill, and annihilate every ethnic and provincial army hostile to them, including women and children, and to take their possessions as spoils of war.

12This would take place on a single day throughout all the provinces of King Ahasuerus, on the thirteenth day of the twelfth month, the month Adar. 13A copy of the text, issued as law throughout every province, was distributed to all the peoples so the Jews could be ready to avenge themselves against their enemies on that day.

Another reversal: now under threat is not the Jews, but those who had determined and schemed to harm the Jews (we will try to pick up some more of these themes next week, because it’s a brutal world)

15-17  15Mordecai went from the king’s presence clothed in royal blue and white, with a great gold crown and a purple robe of fine linen. The city of Susa shouted and rejoiced, 16and the Jews celebrated with gladness, joy, and honor.

17In every province and every city where the king’s command and edict reached, gladness and joy took place among the Jews. There was a celebration and a holiday. And many of the ethnic groups of the land professed themselves to be Jews because fear of the Jews had overcome them.

More reversals

Mordecai’s clothing – remember the sackcloth and ashes City of Susa – remember the confusion, now rejoicing Jews – remember how they were singled out, now gladness joy honor Other ethnic groups – distance to identification

Do you hear what I am trying to emphasize? It’s not just a sigh of relief that a few things were salvaged. It is a celebration of reversal: the tables being completely turned (almost inexplicably).

Again, I’ve come to believe this is one of the main reasons we have the story of Esther. I believe we’re meant to enjoy it and see God’s hand at work when He authors reversals. The Bible is filled with reversals.

There are plenty of UNFAVORABLE reversals – Pharaoh, Goliath, Ahab, Jezebel, Sennacherib, Nebuchadnezzar – each looks so strong, make the life of so many people miserable and God deals with them all

There are also so many FAVORABLE reversals – dramatic changes

Joseph – sold/imprisoned to prime minister Moses – fugitive to redeemer Israelites – enslaved in Egypt to free in Canaan Ruth/Naomi – being destitute to being full David – being targeted to being King Daniel – threatened to being vindicated Israelites – exiled to Home

So, if we pull this thread, and we see this theme all over Scripture, it’s wise to spend time here. I am going to give four words, handles on reversals.

AUTHOR – Even though God isn’t mentioned in Esther, we know that God writes every reversal

Reversals are given by God, not earned by us. We don’t earn the dramatic change of direction. We can’t unilaterally create the conditions for reversal.

All [the King of Heaven’s] works are true and his ways are just. He is able to humble those who walk in pride.  (Nebuchadnezzar in Daniel 4:37)

God is righteous, wise, just, merciful, omniscient. Reversals DON’T just happen. They come from Him, and so we trust!

JOY – Favorable reversals lead to joyful worship. God’s people are meant to enjoy Esther. It’s meant to bring a smile to us.

You turned my mourning into dancing; you removed my sackcloth and clothed me with gladness, so that I can sing to you and not be silent. Lord my God, I will praise you forever. (Psalm 30:11–12)

You find other passages celebrating reversal like the Exodus from Egypt

Moses and the Israelites sang this song to the Lord. They said: I will sing to the Lord; he has thrown the horse and its rider into the sea. The Lord is my strength and my song; he has become my salvation. The Lord is a warrior; the Lord is his name. (Exodus 15:1–3)

Hannah after she’s delivered Samuel. Mary the mother of Jesus echoes so much of Hannah’s song when she hears from Gabriel.

The bows of the warriors are broken, the feeble are clothed with strength. Those who are full hire themselves out for food, but those who are starving hunger no more. The woman who is childless gives birth to seven, but the woman with many sons pines away. The Lord brings death and gives life; he sends some down to Sheol, and he raises others up. (1 Samuel 2:4–6)

David looks back on his life in Psalm 18.

He rescued me from my powerful enemy, from those who hated me, for they were too strong for me. They confronted me in the day of my calamity, but the Lord was my support. For you rescue an oppressed people, but you humble those with haughty eyes.  (Psalm 18:17–18, 27)

Exiles who returned to Jerusalem from Babylon

When the Lord restored the fortunes of Zion, we were like those who dream. Our mouths were filled with laughter, our tongues with shouts of joy. The Lord had done great things for us; we were joyful. (Psalm 126:1–3)

One of the important ways we express our relationship with God is through praise. It says more about us than we care to admit when what God has done doesn’t move the needle for us. But, often, praise should erupt, “God, you’ve done it!”

Esther has brought us so far in appreciating reversal, but we realize the book of Esther is situated in something so much grander, so much sweeter. The Bible builds and builds for us to see the reversal of Jesus.

JESUS – Our greatest reversal is being united to Jesus. As you think about the dramatic changes of direction for him, nothing quite paints it like the language of Philippians 2

Jesus Christ emptied himself by assuming the form of a servant, taking on the likeness of humanity.

Theologians call it the humiliation of Christ. He came from heaven to earth, from “a throne of endless glory to a cradle in the dirt” OR “Mild he lays his glory by,” or "Veiled in flesh the Godhead see; Hail the' incarnate Deity.”

And then humiliation continued as he was misunderstood, hated by many, dismissed, betrayed, eventually crucified

And when he had come as a man, he humbled himself by becoming obedient to the point of death— even to death on a cross.

We capture some of what theologians call the exaltation of what happens next when we sing: “Then bursting forth in glorious day, up from the grave He rose again, and as he stands in victory sin’s curse has lost his grip on me, for I am His and he is mine, bought with the precious blood of Christ.”

For this reason God highly exalted him and gave him the name that is above every name, so that at the name of Jesus every knee will bow— in heaven and on earth and under the earth— and every tongue will confess that Jesus Christ is Lord, to the glory of God the Father. (Philippians 2)

What that means FOR US/YOU – by faith, his reversals are our reversals. Not because of our goodness, but because of His mercy.

Baptism gives us this amazing reality: passing from death to life, buried with him in the likeness of his death, raised to walk with a new life

Paul in Philippians 3 would say I want to be (1) conformed to his death, and (2) I want to know him and the power of His resurrection. Think of the reversals we enjoy because of Him

Outcast – loved                        Wicked – Righteous Enemy – child of God                Evil Heart – clean/renewed heart Guilty – justified                        Out of favor – accepted   Deserving wrath – enjoying grace   Dead – Made Alive

This is what it means to be rescued. This is what you have in Jesus.

The reversal gives new power (Holy Spirit inside transforming you, re-shaping your life so you look more and more like Jesus, living pure, holy lives, out of gratitude, not guilt)

Have you experienced that reversal? Because that dramatically changes things for you, everything!

Because of what Jesus has accomplished for us, our last word isENDURANCE – The promise of reversal fuels our patience. (through the grace of God, we can endure)

Maybe the joy of what God has done has flooded your life, and today, you are overflowing with joy.

I wouldn’t be surprised if several of you in here, it truly feels like a wrecking ball has ruined your life. Not a lot of hope, help on the horizon. You feel like you’ve reached the end.

Could it be that God brought you here because He loves you so much? Maybe it isn’t full blown confidence, but today is the day you begin to believe again that God isn’t finished authoring your story.

Jesus gave His life, what more could He give? That reversal sealed His promises for you!

In any given moment, lots of things in our lives may not look great.

As it is, we do not yet see everything subjected to him. (Hebrews 2:8)

We don’t know the full story, humanly speaking. We need the Spirit’s help in seeing that we are safe in God’s hand, secure in what he's doing.

The God of peace will soon crush Satan under your feet. The grace of our Lord Jesus be with you. (Romans 16:20)

The God of all grace, who called you to his eternal glory in Christ, after you have suffered a little while, will himself restore, establish, strengthen, and support you.  (1 Pe 5:10)

Therefore we do not give up. Even though our outer person is being destroyed, our inner person is being renewed day by day. For our momentary light affliction is producing for us an absolutely incomparable eternal weight of glory. (2 Corinthians 4:16–18)

What reversals are you waiting for? Could you take those to the Lord, and say, “Lord, I believe. Help my unbelief.”

<><><><><>

8.30.2026    Brainerd Baptist Church