COMPLETE IN CHRISTTHE MOST IMPORTANT THINGCOLOSSIANS 1:1-8

INTRO: What are the most important things going on in the world?

News – Iran, Middle East has our attention, persecution of believers in Nigeria, stock market, things happening on a global scale

Sports – brackets, baseball, football

Entertainment and celebrities / music / movies / fashion – who is popular, who is making waves, what’s new, trending

The coverage is almost breathless: “you can’t miss this!”

A lot of “what was important” in 60 A.D. revolved around Rome. Nero is emperor, infamous for paranoia and persecution. The empire is really strong, but dealing with the challenges empires face.

Things going on around the world, records from modern day Britain, North Africa, China/India

What wasn’t making much history is the fact that the Apostle Paul is imprisoned in Rome. He has some close connections to Christians in a town named Colossae a city that wasn’t super important (100+ miles from Ephesus, Athens, Antioch, Alexandria, Jerusalem). From what we can tell, Paul has never even been there. But still he wrote to people there.

Something IMPORTANT was happening. A group of people were living differently. And we’re going to take a look at what he had to say in the book of Colossians over the next several weeks.

The center of everything is Jesus Christ, and much of the book walks you through being complete in Christ. In Jesus, you have everything you need. What was going on there/then could speak to us.

Read Colossians 1:1-8

What important things are happening?

It’s kind of like “who cares about Nero, the army, etc.” Paul is overjoyed, thanking God because very important things are happening in Colossae: a group of people are experiencing a change in their mindset, behavior and identity. Meaning how they think and what they value, what they do (patterns and habits), and who they are (identity).

Paul is constantly thanking God that there has been a massive change, and this shows up in their faith, love and hope. They’re living in new ways.

3We always thank God, the Father of our Lord Jesus Christ, when we pray for you,  4for we have heard of your faith in Christ Jesus and of the love you have for all the saints  5because of the hope reserved for you in heaven.

When you have words like this, it’s wise to sit in them for just a moment.  The foundation of all this change: reserved heavenly hope. That is what is stimulating faith and love. The Colossians have HOPE (5a).

We often speak of hope like an attitude or a vibe – hopeful, wishful thinking, optimism, crossing your fingers

Here, it’s different. It is something reserved. And it’s reserved in HEAVEN, not in their heart/feelings.

It’s a heavenly inheritance. I like the way Doug Moo said it… “the totality of blessing that awaits the Christian in the life to come.”

So, if we speak of an attitude/disposition at all, it would be confident expectation (not fantasy land, or living in denial).

It’s the confidence that you can say on your worst day: “My future is incredibly bright; it’s going to be okay.”

I’ve watched hope like this drive so many good things (even when it’s dark, even when it’s dry and uncertain, and earthly speaking hopeless).

Back to vs 3-5. Hope drives FAITH in Christ Jesus

Paul is so grateful they are more and more confident that Jesus is Lord, the one who can change everything and deliver anyone. The one who was dead, is alive, and reigning forever.

Faith like that doesn’t just appear. It’s day-by-day reliance and trust and dependence

Jesus is the centerpiece of your life – more and more devoted to him, and looking to him for everything

you are growing more and more to see him stabilizing you on the difficult days, leading you to the exact thing you need, extending kindness when you know you’re at you’re breaking point. That’s faith.

Hope also drives LOVE for all the saints – outward movement, not just internally centering. The kind of person who because they can see the big picture extends compassion.

love is action-oriented, not so much feeling-oriented or talk-oriented

Skip to v8, Spirit produces love real, sacrificial displays for people (gifts, sacrifice, bearing with, listening, loving, walking with); seeing needs, a soft heart to people

I literally see it all the time, and it’s amazing. Church is this gathering where you walk into a group of people from very different social statuses all with deep care for each other.

Remember what is happening is a mindset/behavior change, but there’s also truly been an identity change.  WHO THEY ARE!

Look at vs 2. This group is a bunch of SAINTS – relationship to the world

it’s not that you’re “better” than anyone, but you have been marked out. In a world of people doing their own thing their own way, you’re God's possession. He is in you, and you are His.

of course, you are still you, and God knows that, and many things will change over your life, and one day every imperfection will be transformed, but even now in this crazy world, you’re exclusively set apart for Him.

The group at Colossae are identified with FAITHFUL SIBLINGS – saints have a relationship to each other – you aren’t alone with a totally unique experience. You share common spiritual DNA.

They are IN CHRIST – relationship to God. Your spiritual life is located in Jesus. Everywhere you look, you see Him. He’s a friend, hope, helper

there is nothing about you now that doesn’t relate to him in some way (He’s the center, shaper, goal, beginning of all your thoughts, action, past, future, friends, dreams, desires)

What has happened to the Colossians is moving Paul to be really thankful. Does it move us in the same way? Or are we consumed with so many small-ball things, that it just doesn’t take our breath away that this is STILL happening! Does what God is STILL doing strike us as really important?

You come to a youth group, college group, ladies study, a classroom of kids, and you see hope driving love and faith. What a picture!

This passage emphasizes more! He goes deeper into their spiritual history.

What (is the dynamic that has) caused all that to happen?

A message came that changed everything.

5You have already heard about this hope in the word of truth, the gospel  6that has come to you. It is bearing fruit and growing all over the world, just as it has among you since the day you heard it and came to truly appreciate God’s grace.

Did you see those 4 highlighted words. What causes new mindset, actions, identity a faith-filled response to the truthful message of the good news of God’s grace to us through Jesus

WORD/message – not a ponzi scheme, military action, 40-day program, but a straightforward message.

Life can change because of a message, you get a text, you get a call, you get an email, letter. Message delivered. Life changes.

Word of TRUTH – comes with authenticity, reliability, trustworthiness

not a scam, in a world of so lies and deepfakes, this is true

Good news/GOSPEL – not a dialogue/discussion, back and forth, but an announcement, declaration; something momentous has happened (end of a world war), the world has changed.

Momentous news  “we’re happy to tell you that you’ve been selected.” A life could be changed.

GRACE (6)– what you never deserved or earned, you can have: faithful love of God, kindness, compassion

The self-esteem era we live in has made this a little tricky. Of course I don’t want someone feeling like trash. And it grieves me so much when someone has been beat down, abused.

Christians still have an upside down message – we listen as our culture communicates that feeling unworthy is never the right mindset (e.g. you deserve this, you are enough…)

Christians sing different songs – who am I, we stand amazed and wonder how he could love me, a sinner condemned unclean, who else is worthy

we can own the negative labels (sinners, disloyal, quitters, promise-breakers, unimpressive, dirty, foolish, guilty, ashamed)

we know we received something very different (family, friends, saints, free from condemnation, pure, loved). This is all grace.

“Curtis, I don’t know how to process all of that.” We will be learning and growing, and you need safety over a long period of time. In the end it just centers on Jesus. This entire message is wrapped up in God’s work through a person. a person changes it all

who he is (status), how he lived (in perfection), the sacrificial death he died on our behalf

the victory he accomplished through rising, the authority he now has, the future he has promised to bring one day

This is a message of grace, but this kind of message calls for a response. It’s not enough to have facts in your head. You are called on to respond. That’s just what these believers had done

5bYou have already heard about this hope in the word of truth, the gospel  6that has come to you. It is bearing fruit and growing all over the world, just as it has among you since the day you heard it and came to truly appreciate God’s grace.  7You learned this from Epaphras, our dearly loved fellow servant.

He’s already said they have faith in Jesus, but here he digs deeper.

You HEARD it (5,6) – the message is something that has to come to you

no one would ever make this up, message originates from outside of us. It’s not layered philosophy, all of pooling our best thoughts together and deciphering truth somehow.

often through people you know/meet (faithful parents, coworkers, friends, college campus workers, pastors, missionaries), they say something or you read about it, you listen, you hear it.

You come to faith in Jesus. You come to UNDERSTAND/APPRECIATE it

not appreciating or understanding like computer code, or even an art painting. It’s a grasp of just how good a friendship really is (chips were down, you were loved). It’s a realization of the difficult life condition that you were rescued from

Something really clicks, and life is never the same. It goes deeper than a well-written user agreement form, that you clicked on but ignore. This is a beautiful gift you accept, and the start of a brand new life.

And it says you “LEARNED” it (7). Something radical happens on the inside, but you also learn it (over time). You grow in knowledge.

This is less about “will this be on the test?” kind of learning

It is more about learning a person who is committed to faithfully loving you what assurance, confidence, stability that provides

We are learning a new way of life (bearing good fruit)

not to worry, trust;       new habits, deeper about yourselfwork through the parts of you that just have to changeapprenticing, retraining things are coming alive

It’s worth saying that the work of God isn’t geographically bound, ethnically bound, nationally bound (YES, in Colossae). Responses like this happen all over the place. The message is still reproducing and expanding, spreading, and growing throughout the WORLD.

I don’t think I would be a good pastor if I didn’t raise the question… “is that how you’ve responded?” Hearing the message, believing, it clicks, you accept it, learn it. Has that happened to you? And if not, could we talk?

We’ve tried to situate ourselves in Colossae, see the connections we have with them. There’s a personal connection we need to make as we enter into this letter to the Colossians. You might have noticed three names.

There’s PAUL (v1). He has a high status, encourager, prayer partner

I see you trying, I see what the Lord is doing, where your life is goingI prayed for you, I thank God for you, Let me help you see what God is doing. What if you just assumed that might be your role? Nobody died of too much encouragement

And then we read about TIMOTHY. – alongside Paul, brother (not the big dog). No one cares quite like him (Phil 2:20). Faithful at his post

An army of people who are faithful in their assignments. Happy to do God’s work, wherever he places them.

EPAPHRAS – Some of you, this is who you are.

7You learned this from Epaphras, our dearly loved fellow servant. He is a faithful minister of Christ on your behalf, 8and he has told us about your love in the Spirit.

You’re the initiator/teacher/modeler. He will come back a few times, and I always appreciate his influence. You’re helping people get it all. What if you just assumed that might be your role?

You can be a minister (works of service for Jesus and for people). This is the language for priests, but we’re all priests now.

I also like that he’s a good news gossiper (have you heard about ______, you won’t believe how God is working in them.)

What role could you play in what God is doing now?

If you’ve heard the last several messages, you know I am convinced that if you’re a follower of Jesus, you have a role.

What are some of the most important things happening? Our radar is dialed in a little better. They may just be happening with people right here.

Conversations that take some courage, you could have those!Bedtime talks/prayers w/kids, you could keep chipping awayEncouraging texts sent

For some of us here, what it’s going to take for you to get in on the most important stuff?

Crawling out of years of shame, driven by faith, love

Having hope for the first time, or maybe even a reminder that it’s going to be okay.

And if you don’t know where to start, I actually do: we can talk to God and ask for His help!

Prayer

<><><><><>

3.15.2026    Brainerd Baptist Church