COMPLETE IN CHRIST WHATEVER YOU DO COLOSSIANS 3:18-4:1

INTRO: I’ve never been but I can’t imagine the first day of flight school to be a pilot or med school to be a surgeon that the head of the department says, “you’re on your own, you’ll figure it out.”  You’ll be given layers of instruction. Some basics, but also some specific applications. You’ll grow in how you apply wisdom/judgment.

That’s what I find helpful in this portion of Colossians. We’ve said our life is with Christ (diagram). We start so high.

He’s pushed it into our lives personally (these things need to be dealt with, put to death – lust, immorality, greed, put away anger bitterness

our church life together, family of God – sympathy, kindness, humility, God’s peace rules, the message of Jesus to dwell richly

Now he speaks to some really significant relationships within a household. If the Lord has something to say, we want to hear it

18Wives, submit yourselves to your husbands, as is fitting in the Lord. 19Husbands, love your wives and don’t be bitter toward them. 20Children, obey your parents in everything, for this pleases the Lord. 21Fathers, do not exasperate your children, so that they won’t become discouraged. 22Slaves, obey your human masters in everything. Don’t work only while being watched, as people-pleasers, but work wholeheartedly, fearing the Lord. 23Whatever you do, do it from the heart, as something done for the Lord and not for people, 24knowing that you will receive the reward of an inheritance from the Lord. You serve the Lord Christ. 25For the wrongdoer will be paid back for whatever wrong he has done, and there is no favoritism. 1Masters, deal with your slaves justly and fairly, since you know that you too have a Master in heaven.

[[THEN COMPLETE IN CHRIST SLIDE]]

Just reading this passage alerts you to some challenges: #1 – Our world runs in a different direction (when roles in the home are portrayed, what you just heard is often mocked, attacked, made to seem like the worse thing ever). God’s Word often cuts against the grain.

Even if our culture doesn’t hear value this – what the world prioritizes should be less and less a big deal. Help us Lord to be unimpressed (is it really important for us to have a stamp of validation by the world)

#2 – People have misused these texts for their own advantage, have been selfish, diminishing of people, full of hypocrisy, even abuse. In effort to help, everywhere I turn, I want to acknowledge that (not give license to abusers) – broken marriages, broken homes. I easily could run through dozens of “What about" _(this)__” scenarios.

Holding that, I’m called to make God’s Word as clear/amplified as I can).

Thank you for the gift of time dedicated to read, reread, study, dive deep, to try to be ready to present God’s Word in a clear way

The Word of God is a sword, I don’t want to be guilty of dulling the blade.

The NT speaks consistently to family life. This is right in line with the teaching. [of course, slave/masters come with its own complexities]

Actually, when people have followed these words, I’ve seen so much of life go well, so many encouraging things. I actually have confidence here. This isn’t just true and authoritative, it’s good and it’s beautiful.

Starting with an overview. Colossians from the start sees that no one is better than anyone else, except for Jesus, and He is above everyone and everything. But that’s it. People are equal and cared for with love.

But there are arrangements of people, and here they come in PAIRS. Two of these pairs are clearly God-instituted for His purposes

Covenant/binding promise of marriage (God instituted in Gen 2)

Provision/Nurture of parents and children – God’s design for generations to continue (Gen 1&3)

The last pair is earthly rank, how society has arranged itself.

Also notice that with each pair, how in social dynamics one is clearly in a stronger position, one is weaker.

By weaker (wives, children, slaves), I just mean there’s potentially more vulnerability. The person who is stronger could serve or really make life tough. For each of these, Paul intentionally brings the Lord into it, almost saying (there’s a bigger picture than just what’s in front of you. Even if there is a dimension on earth that’s tough, there’s something greater.)

For those in the stronger position (husbands, fathers, masters), he adds something, often responsibility, which if followed would make it much easier for the person in the more vulnerable position to trust

there is a responsibility for flourishing (not just a lot of minutes at your disposal for you to be selfish). You ask “how do I set the conditions where another human has the best chance to live for Jesus?”

On either side, no one is asked to go somewhere Jesus hasn’t gone

17And whatever you do, in word or in deed, do everything in the name of the Lord Jesus, giving thanks to God the Father through him.

That is the standard. Let’s look closely

For the first pair the instruction to WIVES is submit to their husbands

Within the covenant partnership, there’s a lining up, a military arrangement, supporting someone who has taken the lead. It’s voluntary, it’s a choice, not absolute submission, that’s significant

Look at how the Lord factors in – Submit as fitting in the Lord – fits his direction, he takes pleasure in lives coming together as a partnership with mutual goals. “Above all, I am doing this for the Lord.”

HUSBANDS, you are commanded by God to love your wives

God dearly loves you (3:12), and the characteristic of his people is love

In the covenant partnership, husbands, you are to be self-sacrificial, looking to serve the good of her. You are to cultivate more than just a financially stable living arrangement, there’s deep care.

And there’s a layer of responsibility (don’t be bitter) – you never should let your heart get to a sour place, a bitter place

Your spouse and marriage are a privilege, gift, what you’ve been entrusted with from the Lord. Ephesians would say love your wife, as Christ loves the church. Jesus never gets bitter or sours on you, don’t ever let yourself sour on your covenant partner.

You put it together, and what does it look like? I think married couples should be really attentive, but shouldn’t seriously dating/engaged couples listen, and really the whole body.

This is a covenant partnership – Husband looks for ways his wife can flourish in all that God wants her to be/do, willing to lead out in heavy loads, carrying burdens if he can, laying down preferences, make any adjustments, regularly initiates and proposes a path forward; wife supports, follows, how can this partnership thrive for our greater good, where can I extend, fill out, look for ways we can honor Jesus together.

Maybe you think, “Pal, we live in the real world.”

What if it’s gone off the rails. Husband you’re bitter. Wife, finding it harder and harder to submit. What if submission may seem like it’s crossing the line into abuse. You need help, and I want to encourage you to reach out for help.

It’s not quite that serious, but there are personality types, passive/active, bible knowledge, breadwinning, seasons that bring pressure, background of being a Christian (not one-size-fits-all), and what about ____, _____.

It’s tough, and it takes time. But I can think of so many Christians I know who have done it well. Not perfect, but so successful, such an example

Decades, handling crises, working through infidelity, massive strain, growing together, faithful, steady in highs and lows.

In the end, is Jesus our Lord, will His message dwell in us richly, if so, we could talk about complications or certain situations, but let’s turn it around for those who are married, can I point to ______, and say, “that is how, from the heart, I am seeking to live faithfully to Jesus in this area”

We start with wives/husbands, but CHILDREN, you are commanded to obey your parents in everything.

Other passages in the Bible recognize obeying as a child comes to an end, even though honor remains.

The Lord factors in. This pleases the Lord. You are looking to do that.

Clearly if your parents tell you to sin, that wouldn’t be pleasing to the Lord, so don’t do that.

Obedience to the Lord is a regular part of your walk with Jesus (teenager, you likely have thoughts on how the world could be a better place, you aren’t free at that moment to defy the Lord, or your parents)

In trusting the Lord, you listen, honor, obey, do what your parents tell you (quickly, sweetly, completely). God is honored.

Another command is specifically directed to FATHERS (and by extension, moms as well). Dads, you bear a weight here

You probably feel some cultural pressure. The pressure isn’t on you to give them world class education options, little league, dream vacations, everything everyone else has. That’s not mandated here.

Just as husbands are told not to be embittered, dads are told not to exasperate (so full of nagging, provoking for arguments)

picking them apart, never do anything right, cross a mental line that just to irritate, every discussion gets shut down, no-win situation

Maybe a surprising layer of responsibility is that you’re meant to look at the impact. You should care about their spirit not being broken (discouraged), you want their passion, gifts, talents, skills, joy channeled and funneled into a lifetime of loving God, loving others, making disciples

I remember field day – set it up, and then the moment came where the kids came out, so much energy

It’s hard for me just to leave this instruction without saying, I think there’s something positive – praise, show compassion, build up, nurture, show patience with growing maturity, looking for opportunities to speak into situations so that your voice is welcome.

you change the diapers, cook the food, taxi them all over creation

I know this area comes with complications – “What about”

From a kids’ perspective – if you’re parents are abusing – that means they are sinning, they shouldn’t do that, and that has to stop. There are places for godly appeal, questions for explanation

Sadly, maybe you’re adults and you live with a lot of grief, heaviness and even brokenness there – God can meet you in that.

Parents you will mess up. Your kids will have stories to tell of how mom or dad didn’t have their finest moment, we all do.

And your kids might reject the Lord, reject you, despite godly attempts

For all the complications, I’ve seen God providing, and a godly parent looks for ways kids can learn, grow, flourish. And I’ve seen children wrestle through internal disrespect, selfish inclinations.

I praise God for grown men who look their dad in the eye and are extremely grateful, girl grows up to be secure because dad loved her

I thank the Lord for a young lady watching, listening, absorbing, confident and still humble, capable, all because of mom

You want as much of this as you can get; you don’t want “I haven’t spoken to dad in years;” painful to experience, Lord, have mercy.

Lots of joy/exhaustion, battles to pick, and avoid. But God is faithful.

In the end – if I am a child/parent, can I point to ______, and say, “that is how, from the heart, I am seeking to live faithfully to Jesus in this area”

The Slave/Master dynamic comes with many complexities. You even notice a lot more verses of instruction. The church at Colossae had a lot of slaves (Onesimus/Philemon), and there’s also the bigger question:  What does the Bible, do Christians do about slavery?

The Bible isn’t a manual for abolition – here’s how you rebel, here’s the policies and procedures to get legislation passed – often it meets the slave where they are, recognizes, dignifies, and charts out a path

At the same time – Christians have been at the forefront of so many abolition movements, and it’s the Scriptures and theology driving them to realize this is unacceptable. IJM, human trafficking

We live with some internal tension. One connection we can make (even as we acknowledge it isn’t the same thing), is to think of rank/hierarchy (by human standards). Employers, employees; managers, direct reports.

SLAVES are told to obey human masters in everything (obviously there would be boundaries with employment arrangements)

How the Lord factors in that obedience – a lot of specific instruction

As you do what you’re told, your main goal isn’t just making a person happy, but since you fear/reverence the Lord, you do your best

you work, not just when being watched (always some version of this, performance review)

you work wholeheartedly (opposite is halfhearted, checking boxes)

verse 23 amplifies that (for the Lord) – great verse to memorize

verse 24 – there’s a reward of an inheritance (a slave would never have been eligible for that). That would give such deep hope in a hard situation

The Lord, and the Messiah is who you are really serving

On the hardest day, there is a promise of fair, honest judgment (25), so don’t think you get off the hook for what you’ve been told to do

Verse 25 speaks about doing the right thing. But then the next verse says Masters are told to treat people fairly/justly. Of course, that could apply toa manager, supervisor, boss

The added layer is here is that you’re under scrutiny. You have a master in heaven (where it really counts).

People are counting on you to do the right thing. You could set the tone for a lot of people to grow/thrive.

What that looks like. In a world of difficult bosses, and lazy employees, we could ask “what about.” Again, I will turn it… if I am a Christian, can I point to areas where I am under authority or in authority, and say, “that is how, from the heart, I am seeking to live faithfully to Jesus in this area”

Conclusion: Your faith doesn’t just play out in hypotheticals, and it goes far beyond just showing up for church.

The teaching isn’t “easy” but we have enough structure to map on to many key relationships – speaks to all of us here is God’s design.

We’re pushed to think through how can we do this well, better, make course-corrections.

We have a deep need for each other, teaching and warning, Church is a context for relationships (wise women/men – this is what we’ve tried to do/remember/prioritize)

How deeply we will need to draw from the Lord, how much we will need his help

The other day. I saw a tree that had snapped, and in the middle it was really hollowed out (rotten for a while, even though it was still standing), you could tell

but that was just one tree. Literally hundreds around it were growing taller and stronger

God would make the people of BBC strong, growing trees

<><><><><>

5.17.2026    Brainerd Baptist Church