GOD’S WORK | OUR WORKGROWING OUR CLOSENESSPHILIPPIANS 1:1-11; 4:21-23

INTRO: What does it look like for our church, for our hearts to be really united, to be brought together spiritually?

I’ve wanted to spend a few weeks sharing burdens/direction where we as pastors sense the Lord is leading our church. A few weeks ago I shared this big picture of what we see God doing – the heartbeat of our church

People being CHANGED – experiencing God’s grace because of the execution and resurrection of Jesus

CHANGED – enjoy going from guilty to forgiven, death to life, darkness to light, outsider to son/daughter of God

CHANGED – desires, habits, values, lifestyles, thought patterns

That is why Jesus came and why Brainerd exists, but there’s more… Changed people being GATHERED

around King Jesus, united by Him, devoted to Him, His causeswith each other, YES on Sundays AND also being together as a regular part of our lives

What could that “being together” look like? What should that look like?

We’re not just left to brainstorm, collaborate and put our best ideas out there. We have God’s Word, and it will be really useful for all of us to ask “Where are we? Is the Lord working on us? What if He helped us be all that He designed us to be?” Our series is God’s Work and Our Work.

Today, we’ll start with Scripture, and try to assess where we are.

Let’s go to the very end of Philippians. You’ll see a flow or progression of relationships that people who are gathered around Jesus have

The gathered community around Jesus is where people are known, loved, and prayed for. That’s the flow.

4:21–23 21Greet every saint in Christ Jesus. The brothers who are with me send you greetings. 22All the saints send you greetings, especially those who belong to Caesar’s household. 23The grace of the Lord Jesus Christ be with your spirit.

There are ways of saying generically “tell everyone hi.” This hits different.

4:21 – every saint in Christ Jesus4:21 – brothers with me send you greetings4:22 – All the saints (especially Caesar’s household); some specificity

Really personal touch. Now, flip over to the first few verses

1Paul and Timothy, servants of Christ Jesus: To all the saints in Christ Jesus who are in Philippi, including the overseers and deacons. 2Grace to you and peace from God our Father and the Lord Jesus Christ. 3I give thanks to my God for every remembrance of you…

v1:  “All the saints,” including those who have some specific spiritual responsibilities for the flock

v3:  He remembers them (a lot)

Again, it’s personal. He’s doing more than being polite. Names come out of it later: Epaphroditus, Euodias, Syntyche, Clement.

The general flow in the NT is when you enter into the family of God, you go from anonymous to KNOWN.  People are KNOWN (Paul may not know every single person, but it’s more personal than generic. He’s trying.

I don’t just mean known by God, I mean known by other Christians. This is the normal pattern.

Jesus started this. He calls people by name (Lazarus, Mary, Zacchaeus, Martha, Simon, Philip). Jesus knows people, and so it’s really natural that His followers work to know people.

The next progression is that people who are known are also LOVED

3I give thanks to my God for every remembrance of you, 4always praying with joy for all of you in my every prayer, 5because of your partnership in the gospel from the first day until now. 6I am sure of this, that he who started a good work in you will carry it on to completion until the day of Christ Jesus. 7Indeed, it is right for me to think this way about all of you, because I have you in my heart, and you are all partners with me in grace, both in my imprisonment and in the defense and confirmation of the gospel. 8For God is my witness, how deeply I miss all of you with the affection of Christ Jesus.

v3: I give thanks, I remember youv4: you bring me joy [I got to meet you, see God’s work in you]v5: we really are together, we really are partnersv7: I hold you in my heart [it totally lines up; it’s as it should be]v8: I miss you deeply (ALL of you) with the affection of Christ Jesus

the flow is that known people become LOVED people

The truth is if you don’t really know someone, you don’t love them. We can have generic feelings, but it has to get more concrete than that. And what Paul is talking about is heart knitted together, bonded together, deep investment, deep care for each other. LOVED! In other words, it’s exactly how Jesus did relationships

John 13:1, he loved his disciples to the endJohn 15 – He calls them friends. Not of the facebook variety.Mark 10:21 – Jesus looks at a young rich man and loves himDo you love me? He asks to Peter (John 21).

I know you, I love you. We’re together.

What would be the opposite: collection of saints who get together but are pretty isolated [living in their own world, doing their own thing]. That would be a foreign concept in Scripture.

Sometimes I do have to wonder if how we go to the movies is how we think of the church. For the movie it’s just about the show, whether we’re impressed, inspired, learn something, moved. At church, is it just about the talk/music?When I go to the movies, I’m not there to connect with my fellow movie goers. And yet, do we walk into and out of church that way? What do we miss out on? What might others miss out on? Is that all there is?

I am holding out something very different: anonymous to Known to Loved

One more progression – loved people are PRAYED FOR people

2 (or more) people both are experiencing and enjoying all the grace God has for them in Jesus are bonded together; it’s inevitable that God is brought into the relationship through prayer (thanks/requests)

We’ve already read: Paul prays prayers of thanksgiving (3) during regular prayer times (4) for an enduring partnership (5) – we’re doing this together

When I think about what God has started, I get excited because he will finish it (6) – prayers that he will

Read a prayer (9-11):

9And I pray this: that your love will keep on growing in knowledge and every kind of discernment, 10so that you may approve the things that are superior and may be pure and blameless in the day of Christ, 11filled with the fruit of righteousness that comes through Jesus Christ to the glory and praise of God.

What a special prayer! Jesus prays like this too. He prays that his disciples would be unified, Simon Peter’s faith NOT to fail, he still prays on our behalf for us). It makes sense that people united to Jesus would pray for each other.

Hear how Paul prays. He’s got individuals in mind, whom he loves deeply. He’s caring for them through prayer…

Help them to know how to love, to love more, and to get better at it

Help them to know how to choose the best thoughts, actions (discernment)

Help them to be spiritually productive: life doesn’t go up in smoke because they lived for what didn’t matter

All of this to God’s greater glory

How better off are they because Paul is directing his attention in the Spirit through the Son to the Father. Later on in the chapter, Paul imagines that they will return the favor of praying for him (1:19)

We get a glimpse: “here’s how I can be so invested in ‘them’ that I know how to talk to God specifically on their behalf.”  Someone cares so deeply they have insight into what another person needs. I have gone to a fair share of Parent / Teacher conferences. Some teachers – they know my kid, they love my kid, they are deeply invested in my kid. They’re so helpful in navigating parenting.

Am I that invested with my brothers/sisters? I know what makes them tick. I know how to pray for them.

It’s a sweet flow: people who are known, loved and prayed for. But it’s worth taking the time to step back and assess: Is that happening here? If it were a plumbing issue, is the plumbing working correctly? Is it flowing in the right direction? Is it just adequate, barely passing, or is it increasing?

Worth thinking about it very personally —> How does my life fit into this pattern in Philippians. If you’re a family, how does that fit.

As far as people being KNOWN…

Is God bringing anyone new into my life (specifically at Brainerd)?

How long has it been since that has happened that I’ve welcomed someone in, or my group has welcomed someone in. Months/years. Am I looking (active/passive)?

Worth zooming out and thinking about it congregationally

We hear names, we hear greet every saint, and we look at how well we know each other, how well we know the people who call this church home, we know them.  Does it line up?Is it easier rather than harder to be known, or is it sometimes likely no one would know much about your life, maybe not even your name

As far as people being LOVED

Love is a choice (more than just a feeling), so does that sound like the choices you’re making. Regularly moved to emotion, because of deep affection, another person coming up in conversation. Hard stuff – I am with you. I am your friend

Or is it more selfishness than sacrifice. No sense of obligation; stays at the acquaintance stage, perpetually casual

Are there relationships that are going deeper?

church can be a contact sport. Sacrifices made, openness extended, bearing with. Are we close enough to overlook small faults

As far as people being PRAYED FOR?

Do relationships stay on the surface spiritually [is the glue Jesus or is it hobbies, stage of life, status]

We go to a Bible study together, on the same distribution list for prayer requests, we consume Bible material, sing songs together; but there isn’t a spiritual connection —> Would we have insight enough into people’s lives to know how to pray?

Do we go deep enough spiritually. Is it a case where we really know each other’s doubts, fears, hard times, struggles, sin patterns

are you doing alright? How can I pray for you? Can I pray for you? I just prayed for you.

loss of a job – how is everyone doing?death in the family – Going to God on their behalf; we’re figuring it out, because of our deep lovetroubling illness, mental health, caregiving, addiction, stormy marriage, challenging parenting, loneliness

Questions land pretty hard for me. A C+ or even a B- grade in this dept, doesn’t sit super well.

Maybe your mind is racing. You have ideas. Helpful ideas. There are some things we can think about.

Membership refresh – Brainerd will always have people coming in, moving on. Who is here now? Are they here? Have they moved on? Every list you look at people who haven’t been here in years. Is that helpful?

Welcoming/communicating new members coming into the congregation

Directory/pictures – a snapshot of who is here now

Other initiatives/programs we can start

Changes we could make with our organizational structure so we’re closer to people and their needs instead of further away, so we’re not program organizers, but we care deeply for each person gathered around Jesus

But if we don’t have the burden from the Lord, we aren’t going anywhere. We’re trying to design experiences. If we aren’t open to the Holy Spirit.

In preparing for this message, I got an email (lots of them), but this one was on the marketing side, about creating community and connection. People talking, doing life together. It was from Starbucks.Pardon me for being a tad cynical about Starbucks and community.

And I am sure Target or Lowes would love for me to feel a sense of connection and belonging each time I shop there. I am cynical.

But there’s something I am not cynical about: Paul asking God to take a church’s heart to a crucial place

1 Thessalonians 3:12 And may the Lord cause you to increase and overflow with love for one another and for everyone, just as we do for you.

I am not cynical about the church. Here’s what I can envision.

The love of Jesus overflows through us. Imagine instead of staying on the surface forever, we end up deeply loving the person he is sending us. God sets it in motion that when there’s sickness, grief, it will be met with deep love.

The person who is just almost painfully introverted, instead of just feeling content with being lost in a big crowd becomes more and more curious about the lives of a handful of people. They lean in. They become closer than family.

The person who hasn’t branched out in 5 years at church, God works, and they decide they will make someone new feel welcome. “Do you want to sit with us?” And the Lord smiles on that

The people who have endured too much church hurt, find a real welcome and a deep love. Patient friends.

The person who wonders whether this is safe enough to grieve a serious loss or whether the person with a past wondering whether people will be patient with them as they grow. They find love.

The one who once fell into the trap of treating church like a consumer product, kind of thought it was all about hype music and a helpful talk, finds themselves coming early, staying late, talking to people, giving of themselves for the good of others. Sunday is almost a workday.

CONCLUSION

Jesus is Lord here and the more I think about him being right at the center of our gathering, the more I am so confident He’s going to do something here! Not because we’re so special, but often in spite of us.

A painful description of how we treated or would treat Jesus is in Is 53:2-3.

As Jesus was facing the most difficult moments of his life, we didn’t KNOW him. We didn’t bother. We didn’t value him. We really had no time for him, and found no reason to look at him.

We surely didn’t LOVE him. We despised, rejected him, turned away from him because we didn’t want to be identified with that level of shame.

We didn’t think to PRAY FOR him. He was taken away, struck down, cut off, left alone in his hours of deep darkness.

And yet He persevered. He chose to know us, to love us, and to pray for us (forgive them, they don’t know what they’re doing). He overcame. With great courage, headstrong love, he saw our redemption all the way through

He suffered, endured, bled, died for you, for us. For life, peace, forgiveness. But now he’s risen, in charge, and working in this world, working especially in His church, making us more like Him as we grow closer in our love for each other, and for everyone.

He can and will do in us more than we could never organize or strategize our way through. His love just overflows. he causes it to increase.

So, I want us all to assess where we are. And then I want each one of us to express this together. Because of how deeply Jesus loves us, and how deeply Jesus loves the world.

May the Lord cause us to increase and overflow with love for each other and for everyone.

PRAYER

<><><><><>

2.8.2026  Brainerd Baptist Church