BEHIND THE SCENES WHAT IS YOUR DESTINY? ESTHER 4

INTRODUCTION: Sometimes, it seems like destiny is the right word.

Lincoln destined to be president through Civil War Corrie Ten Boom destined to help us see grace in the Holocaust Eisenhower destined to be a D-Day General Harriet Tubman destined to run the Underground Railroad

Do you believe in destiny? Some of you may not think about it much, but if you do, do you think destiny applies to the really important people and really big moments in life? Or could there be small moments of destiny.

There’s not a more helpful chapter in the Bible to think about destiny than Esther 4, as we continue our series (series slide) this morning.

Many of you know actually may know or have read the big moment of destiny in this chapter. But for all of us, could I ask you for a favor: Let the drama build. We’re going to think in terms of movements that build. Sense some urgency with each movement

Our starting point (3:15) – Susa is in full meltdown mode (confusion and fear). We’ve been introduced to all the main characters

Ahasuerus – the powerful Persian king swayed easily by people Haman – emerges as an evil man, author of the confusion, an enemy who wants to annihilate every Jew, and seems to have laid all the necessary groundwork to execute his plan seamlessly and ruthlessly Esther – a Jew who has now become Queen of Persia through less-than-ideal circumstances Mordecai – like an uncle figure to Esther, watching out for her

We come into MOVEMENT ONE with confusion and a lot of tension

4:1–5 1When Mordecai learned all that had occurred, he tore his clothes, put on sackcloth and ashes, went into the middle of the city, and cried loudly and bitterly. 2He went only as far as the King’s Gate, since the law prohibited anyone wearing sackcloth from entering the King’s Gate. 3There was great mourning among the Jewish people in every province where the king’s command and edict reached. They fasted, wept, and lamented, and many lay in sackcloth and ashes. 4Esther’s female servants and her eunuchs came and reported the news to her, and the queen was overcome with fear. She sent clothes for Mordecai to wear so that he would take off his sackcloth, but he did not accept them. 5Esther summoned Hathach, one of the king’s eunuchs who attended her, and dispatched him to Mordecai to learn what he was doing and why.

Mordecai makes a statement, a protest! He visibly mourns.

There’s a custom of tearing clothes in sadness/despair (and you also wear sackcloth/ashes). Equivalent of a sign, hunger strike

Verbal response – cried loudly, bitterly –we don’t read of prayers of repentance, the weeping, fasting, mourning goes along with it, (especially in Joel 2]. Esther always reads differently

Physical presence – the middle of the city, but only so far, entrance to the king’s gate

Many others feel it as well. (3)

When Esther is described, she’s really in the dark about what’s going on

She’s notified via eunuchs/young women about Mordecai’s actions. She is deeply distressed  [not over the decree, but Mordecai]. She sends garments for the purpose of removing sackcloth.

She seems very isolated in the palace (very separated; not glamorous)

Mordecai refuses to take what she sends. She wants to get to the bottom of everything, learning what he was doing and why. We are in MOVEMENT TWO then which is more intense, more pressure is building.

4:6–8 6So Hathach went out to Mordecai in the city square in front of the King’s Gate. 7Mordecai told him everything that had happened as well as the exact amount of money Haman had promised to pay the royal treasury for the slaughter of the Jews. 8Mordecai also gave him a copy of the written decree issued in Susa ordering their destruction, so that Hathach might show it to Esther, explain it to her, and command her to approach the king, implore his favor, and plead with him personally for her people.

Mordecai undoubtedly escalates things with facts and documentation.

Here’s the exact sum of money (not dealing with hypotheticals, but reality: money for the slaughter of the Jews)

A copy of the decree issued in Susa for destruction: show it to Esther, explain it, command her to go/approach/implore/plead personally for her people. Implied in this is that Esther OWES it to her people to do this. This is her responsibility.

Mordecai is bold, and we’re about to hear Esther’s voice for the first time in this story, as she pushes back:

4:9–11 9Hathach came and repeated Mordecai’s response to Esther. 10Esther spoke to Hathach and commanded him to tell Mordecai, 11“All the royal officials and the people of the royal provinces know that one law applies to every man or woman who approaches the king in the inner courtyard and who has not been summoned—the death penalty—unless the king extends the gold scepter, allowing that person to live. I have not been summoned to appear before the king for the last thirty days.”

Did you forget something, Mordecai? Here’s what we all know! Relay this to him: everyone knows (all the royal officials, all the people):

If you go into the king’s court uninvited, you’ll be put to death.

One exception – if the king extends the scepter, then you live

Here’s what you might not know: my personal situation – no call in the last 30 days (I’m not close to this; we aren’t tag-teaming ruling Persia)

You can hear the reluctance. What should Esther do? Should she go before the king. Tell him he might’ve missed it and it’s time to change the decree. (These Persians seem proud of their decrees).

I am not sure of everything that was giving Esther reluctance. I’ve read speculation she’s gotten comfortable or apathetic or selfish. Why the caution and fear, because it’s very high stakes. We just don’t know.

We’re ready for MOVEMENT THREE which is the most intense, and will give us the most to chew on today.

4:12–14 12Esther’s response was reported to Mordecai. 13Mordecai told the messenger to reply to Esther, “Don’t think that you will escape the fate of all the Jews because you are in the king’s palace. 14If you keep silent at this time, relief and deliverance will come to the Jewish people from another place, but you and your father’s family will be destroyed. Who knows, perhaps you have come to your royal position for such a time as this.”

Mordecai is saying: Esther, you don’t have ideal options, and you don’t really have any great options.

If you think you can sit this one out. You can’t! You won’t escape in the king’s palace while everyone else is threatened.

Somehow, in some way, a rescue is going to come, and that will mean a moving train passes you by. BUT, you and your father’s house will be destroyed  → footnote of history

Mordecai is direct, bold, but he doesn’t just frame it negatively. There is a real opportunity for Esther in verse 14 and it’s well-known.

Who knows, perhaps you’ve come to your royal position for such a time as this.

I see really important questions emerging in Esther 4. DESTINY QUESTION – Has Esther been positioned by God for the good of others?

That isn’t exactly the way the book of Esther frames it (God isn’t explicitly mentioned, even though this would be the perfect opportunity).

This is Esther, so you could dial it back, maybe something like: Are you supposed to act for the ultimate good of someone else?

There’s a “who knows” and a “perhaps.” Injects an invitation to think about what is going on more deeply.

You came to this place, here in Persia, you have a royal role What an opportunity. What access you’ve been given. For this very time (there is a timing element)

Even without complete certainty, you could be the destined agent of relief and deliverance for a whole group of people.

This is DESTINY language. It’s the most healthy kind, because the destiny is serving others, looking out for their good. That’s significantly different than destiny only resulting in the benefit of our personal fame, brand.

So much is riding on all of this moment!

4:15–17 15Esther sent this reply to Mordecai: 16“Go and assemble all the Jews who can be found in Susa and fast for me. Don’t eat or drink for three days, night or day. I and my female servants will also fast in the same way. After that, I will go to the king even if it is against the law. If I perish, I perish.” 17So Mordecai went and did everything Esther had commanded him.

Esther is now giving orders. Her words: Go assemble all the JEWS. This is a steady theme (the fate of all the Jews, the Jewish people, your Father’s family in 13-14). These are God’s people, and so…

She’s answered the SELF-DENIAL QUESTION – Will Esther identify with the people of God even at personal risk or cost?

A big thread of Scripture is this question: Are you identified in some way with the people of God? Yes, your relationship with God is personal, but it’s never merely individualistic.   Are you with the people of God? Who is on the Lord’s side, with the people who are truly His?

She fasts with her people (it doesn’t say she prayed, I think it’s implied), and then she gives the very bold declaration – “If I perish, I perish”

Same spirit in Daniel of the 3 Hebrews – even if God doesn’t deliver us immediately, we’re not changing course.

Tracking each movement in this story is so powerful. This transformation in Esther is so inspirational to me.

Esther’s not in a position of strength, but she’s willing to act, even suffer. She’s courageous, ready to make an unsafe decision

She’s had so many difficulties, and here it seems to turn. She doesn’t let the past or her circumstances define her.

Surely all of that moves you. Yet, it could be a little too easy to leave this as just a generic inspirational moment [Just do it! Burn the ships. No pain, no gain. This can be your finest hour.]   We have to do better than that.

While Esther intentionally leaves a few things undefined and unsaid, I want to make sure some things are unmistakable.

Esther intentionally leaves things a bit vague, but other Scriptures makes truth very CLEAR.

This isn’t about just a “HIGHER POWER” / or an impersonal FORCE

We are referring to God, the Almighty, the God of Abraham, Isaac and Jacob, Judge of everyone, Savior, Lord of hosts, the maker of heaven and earth, the one who speaks through the Apostles/Prophets, the one who has acted in history as recorded in Scripture, one essence, and he is revealed in Scripture as God the Father, God the Son, God the Spirit

He’s personal, not a figment of our imagination. He doesn’t change. He’s faithful, merciful and all-powerful. This is who is at work

Nothing compares to His wisdom! Speaking of wisdom, we see who He is on display. We don’t just adopt the “everything happens for A reason” mindset. When we read the rest of Scripture, it isn’t so much a “who knows how it will work out.” God tells us exactly what He’s doing BIG PICTURE.

He is eternally sovereign, He designs, and creates a very good world. He guides this world with his providence, wisdom.  He has purposes.

When we sin he initiates a rescue plan, through the family of Abraham, the Jews, that culminates in Jesus the Messiah coming to earth as a human being.

Jesus is perfect, yet goes to the cross as a sacrifice for sin. His perfect life is credited to those who believe in Him. His sacrificial death is credited to those who follow Him. He rises, giving them new life. After rising, he ascends to heaven, he gives His Spirit to seal believers until He returns, he comes back. Yes, he rules, he reigns. And he will reign forever in the new heavens and new earth, and actually everything will be made new.

This is the true story of Scripture! This is the way it always works when you start adding definition and clarity. And keeping that in mind, it’s worth revisiting the big Esther questions.

Have you been positioned by God for the good of others?

When it comes to the destiny questions of your life, your whole life is in His hands. It’s worth asking if you might have a 1000 little “for such a time as this moments,” not just the big ones.

There is only 1 you.  And what if you weren’t waiting for 1 big moment, but you saw this season, these roommates/coworkers, neighbors, this time, as something given to you from the Lord for His purposes which always are significant

I appreciate the role God’s sovereignty can play. It’s never a crutch or an excuse to avoid acting (“God will take care of it, so why should I do anything?). It doesn’t work that way. God’s sovereignty moves people into action. There’s an activity, sometimes that activity is intense praying, but it regularly involves YOU taking steps of faith.

You aren’t God and you can’t make everything line up. But you CAN love your neighbor. You can look for ways to bless. You CAN use your words to build up. You can be merciful, patient, kind.

And when it comes to the SELF-DENIAL question. Will you identify with the people of God even at personal risk or cost?

In the OT (even here), we have the nation of Israel as the people of God. In the NT, baptized believers from all nations are grafted in to this family. They become, we become the body, and bride of Christ, we are united with Jesus. Are we identified with the people of Jesus?

Will there be 1000 moments where we count the cost?

I see this regularly. People doing more than “volunteering or plugging holes.” I see people regularly take hours of their week and serve, some public, some behind the scenes, and investing it in serving others: especially the younger people who belong to Brainerd.

You choose not to be a consumer, but for the name of Jesus and the family of God, you pour yourself out.

You witness, you go to places [hard places], you make disciples. You aren’t ashamed of Jesus. He’s such a part of you, and your life is defined by belonging to Him, and being close to people who also belong to Him.

You have the benefit of being a part of a fellowship at Brainerd where you have examples of people who’ve identified with Jesus here at this place for decades. What a gift! They show us He’s worth it.

CONCLUSION

What will sustain a life of these kinds of choices and decisions, what can possibly fuel thousands of these sacrifices?

It’s in knowing Jesus. We can be inspired by Esther, but we will be forever CHANGED by Jesus.

Jesus who chose to identify with us, in all of our weakness. Jesus who came with no formal position of earthly power, no armies at his disposal, but was made in the likeness of humans, suffering for sin, which was not his own

Jesus praying, not my will but yours be done – knowing it involved certain death (there wasn’t “who knows” or “if I die, I die”).

Jesus choosing to give his life for me, for you, doing so out of love, reconciling us to God. He perishes in his flesh, that we might live.

Now through the resurrection, he offers new life to you. Real life, what you were made for. He calls on you to trust in Him, to live your life for Him, not for yourself.

Not just will you ever have an Esther “for such a time as this” moment, but rather do you know Jesus? Are you His?

<><><><><>

8.9.2026  Brainerd Baptist Church