GOD’S WORK | OUR WORKREACHING OUR REGION1 THESSALONIANS 1

INTRO: Since January, I’ve been sharing from my heart not so much initiatives or programs but really some burdens and direction for our church, and I so appreciate how so many have been listening and engaging.

If you’ve been tracking with us, so far, a lot of what I’ve been talking about happens inside the church family.

A culture growing where people are known, loved, prayed for which doesn’t just happen. People go to work. Nehemiah/Romans gave us a picture of a  burden for God’s work, real people, real assignments, real effort. God’s work being done, God being honored (name hallowed, will being done, kingdom coming)

So we have focused on the work being done inside the gathering: helping us grow in holiness, working out God’s grace/will in our lives, bearing burdens, walking together.

What about outside this gathering? What about people who aren’t here? People who aren’t here (yet).

Many of us feel an impulse of something more: What if the worship of Jesus was constantly expanding, spreading, succeeding so that more and more people were experiencing and enjoying all that God has for them. We’re not really talking about a good looking quarterly report but the glory of Jesus being treasured and spilling over into our area.

Let’s spend some time there today.

I want you to appreciate some of this from 1 Thess 1 – Paul loved and was invested in and encouraged by Thessalonians.

5…our gospel did not come to you in word only, but also in power, in the Holy Spirit, and with full assurance.6…you welcomed the message with joy from the Holy Spirit.9-10…you turned to God from idols to serve the living and true God and to wait for his Son from heaven, whom he raised from the dead—Jesus, who rescues us from the coming wrath.

We’ve mentioned the change (diagram) that the cross makes.

While we were sinners, God showed us (and keeps showing us) amazing grace in Jesus

Romans 5:8 – Christ died for us

On our own, we aren’t pretty good people. Our story is one of darkness, death, hostility, debt (record of wrongs), guilt, bondage, corruption

But that changes, not because we’re good people. 1 Corinthians – not many noble, wise (not the best of the lot).

God rescues us. We are changed.

But, I want you to see what happens to changed believers

7As a result, you became an example to all the believers in Macedonia and Achaia. 8For the word of the Lord rang out from you, not only in Macedonia and Achaia, but in every place that your faith in God has gone out.

That had an effect. “you lived in such a way that all the nonbelievers in Macedonia and Greece could see it.” The word “rang out.” a sound is made and it is used spreading out from a center over an area

More and more people, not only in Macedonia/Achaia, have heard the message about the Lord because of what you’ve done, what you’re doing, how you live. Look at the extent to which the message about the Good News spread as the result of their example. People everywhere are hearing the news about how you have trusted in God.”

It’s been a few weeks since I’ve shown this diagram, but there is a top arrow (CHANGE), which we’ve been discussing. But there’s another arrow, the bottom arrow (CALLED). What are we saying by that arrow?

So, fueled (and amazed) by his love for us and the world, we pray for and pursue open doors (intentional interactions) with people where we can share Jesus and the gospel message.

We are called, compelled to go. The love of Christ compels us. (2 Corinthians 5:14-15. How could we want someone to live without ever personally experiencing perfect love from God?

“Every kid needs an adult to believe in them.”

Means we go, we’re called to be witnesses

Words are required – speak, teach, attempt to persuade, reason, declare, invite, call for a response. We speak of the praises of the one who called us out of darkness (1 Peter 2:9)

As we go, because we’re called, the Holy Spirit works in (prepares?) hearts and people respond in repentance, faith and devotion to Jesus.

Acts, Lydia – opens hearts, eyes, minds (Acts 16)

Something clicks. Not so much a total leap in the dark – coming back to the one who made me, and who can make me new.

Everyone serves something or someone, coming back to the only good Master and Lord who makes us flourish

God calls people, they respond, and are never the same.

Something comes ALIVE. Ephesians – we were dead, he made us alive. Baptism is declaring that picture.

This is all about grace! Not by doing a bunch of good things, by believing, relying, following

That brings a change, and a real sign of that change is that Jesus-believers are welcomed into and belong to the growing family gathered around Jesus. The Lord adds to the church those who are being saved.

Gather with other believers (set of relationships) which is just an appetizer of heaven.  Heaven is this perfect gathering of Jesus-believers around King Jesus. We are imperfect, but every now and then we get glimpses.

Notice what happens as the church is launched

Acts 2:47 – Every day the Lord added to their number those who were being saved.

Acts 16:5 – So the churches were strengthened in the faith and grew daily in numbers.

So, as I read Acts and the NT, this is what we see. I pray that we might see this picture weekly.  Weekly stories of the ongoing work of God in drawing people to Jesus.

Beyond numbers, actual names, actual stories

Not only big decisions, but progress, growth, movement, faithfulness

(DIAGRAM)

Transition: I remember playing football in high school. This person blocks this person. Touchdown every time. It didn’t go down like it’s drawn up.

If we have this picture or vision of God doing work weekly? What goes wrong? Why doesn’t it happen? Some specific dynamics that means we can often struggle as we zoom in on the CALLED arrow.

Not sure this is unique to Brainerd, not saying this is exclusive. Helpful to call IT out, not necessarily calling YOU out.

If this is going to be challenging at Brainerd, it will often be in one of these areas.

WE GET DISTRACTED. It’s so easy for us to get sidetracked.

How does our distraction show up?

We get distracted and divided, the mission gets lostThis gets deprioritized, or maybe handed off to a few specialists

Too many of us end up too content with little to no part in actually being used by God in His good work

We end up getting so angry with a messed up world, we retreat + we despise

We feel overwhelmed (need, number, complexity, difficulty), we talk ourselves out of even trying anything.

We get satisfied: a whole lot of people, focus on a lot of church things.

WHEN (not if) that happens, we need the Lord to remind us of his love, of who we are, of what he’s done, and what he can do.

Let me give you an image. What if in those moments we get distracted or lose focus, we encourage each other to keep our FOOT ON THE PEDAL

Intentional intersections

Your presence can make a difference as you are a friend, neighbor, positive voice, calming person. That opens a door, and you’re ready.

Creativity – where can this happen (more). We just never know where God might be working

We all have a VESTED INTEREST. Even if you think, “I am no good at confrontational or walk-up evangelism.” I think you might be surprised. But, even with that, you are still part of the mission.

You could play a role in God doing something weekly. As God worked, what if more and more and more people were drawn to Jesus?

It’s easy to ask “So, is it about the numbers?”

When a plane does a water landing in the Hudson, and lives are at stake. For the rescue workers, it was a numbers game (155).

What’s the goal? ALL of them. how many can we rescue? Report, no one was lost, # of people who were rescued.

It’s easy to lose our urgency.

Why do we hear so few stories? What blocks that

We forget that the deepest things we hope for are (humanly) impossible to achieve.

We forget our condition apart from God’s mercy and intervening grace. We forget the deception, the lies, the path of destruction.

Jeremiah 16:19 Lord, my strength and my stronghold, my refuge in a time of distress, the nations will come to you from the ends of the earth, and they will say, “Our ancestors inherited only lies, worthless idols of no benefit at all.”

That’s the picture (slavery, corruption, death) and it’s awful.

Why is that a problem? It’s a problem if we don’t realize the darkness. It’s a problem if we think there’s just a marketing formula that is fool-proof, or if there’s a method that has guaranteed results. It’s a problem if we think we can manipulate results, or do a little dabbling and all of a sudden massive things happen.

No, it takes the Lord to work. And He does!

We forget that’s the way it works, even with our own kids, who will be raised hearing the gospel. Do we think trusting in Jesus is a decision we can pretty much get them to make?

On our best days we understand and remember there is…

Satanic plan against their wellbeing

Sinful flesh that pulls – ways that seem right but end in death, deeper captivity, less long-term satisfaction, dehumanizing, shame/guilt-inducing

World system with (deceitful) philosophies that entice and attract

Kids, Teenagers, students, adults, new to church, church all of your life – it’s always a miracle

Note: Maybe you come to the conversation where you personally have never really grasped the miracle side of it. Maybe God is doing something inside of you. How awesome that would be.

What can help us? Who can help us? We are ON OUR KNEES

The fight so intenseThe outcome so counter to our sinful fleshSuch an usual way of life (beyond embracing a set of moral values)

However, God is SO consistently good and gracious. He is so powerful

opening eyes and hearts, giving people capacities to see and believemoving hearts, drawing people inputting an end to schemes that would destroyextending his love

We pray. Everyone is part of the “ON OUR KNEES” team

introvert, novice, wounded, weary, carry that burden, look for God to work.

What is a challenge for us with the called arrow? We become a little disconnected, rather than remembering that

our ultimate (earthly) goal is for people to be gathered with other people around Jesus

When I read how believers were added to their number, that was not just a heavenly database entry. There were real relationships, meeting together, life together eating together. They were really added

Sometimes, the focus of evangelism can feel like a transaction that prepares someone for heaven. Everyone believes that’s important.

And yet, what if it included that AND meant something for our schedule on Tuesdays, and Sundays. What if we have the privilege of the friends who have been changed by grace coming into our lives, coming to birthday parties because they are friends, and really more than family. What if we prayed for each other, and exchanged birthday gifts. What if we became so invested we knew family members and grandkids names.

Then we would know this is more than just aiming for “decisions” or making someone a “project.” It’s about welcoming people into our lives and sensing responsibility for them.

Occasionally, there is this one time contact. We want to make the most of those opportunities. But, more often than not there’s something more.

Could we LOCK ARMS to bring people in?

As they identify with Jesus in baptism

As they go deeper as part of this gathered, changed, called community

As they work through change, good change, but it’s a massive change: habits, values, time spent on Sunday morning, lifestyle changes, financial changes, recovery, brokenness

The community wraps around them.

CONCLUSION

If anything should sit heavy on us, this should. What can/should you do?

1. Be sensitive. Ask the Lord to work on your heart. One of the fruits of the Spirits work in our lives is LOVE. God doesn’t guilt us into going, but grace drives on every level. Is there something I am missing with God’s grace?

2. Ask God for and keep your eye out for (at least) 1 opportunity this week. One conversation you initiate, one step you take to put yourself out there, one message you send, one invitation you give. You speak of Jesus, you take it to a personal faith level.

<><><><><>

3.1.2026  Brainerd Baptist Church