WEEK OF PRAYER 2026TEACH US TO PRAYLUKE 11:1-13

1.  In a couple of weeks, I do want to begin a series of messages where I hope to share with you some burdens I have for our church (Jan. 18).

2.  This week we will be having our week of prayer.

No passage has done more to help me, simplify things, give me some handles on talking to God as Luke 11 has. I’ve taught this passage before, and as I read in a moment, you might recognize a lot of it, if you’ve grown up in church.  Read Luke 11:1-13

Lord teach us to pray. Over your lifetime, a lot of you have been in a place where you’ve experienced good teaching (I know I have been). You are in an especially good position to appreciate what the master teacher is doing. A good teacher often…

lays down first principles – here are the basicsasks questions – Do you understand? How did it go when you tried?share stories – let me make it simple (not just impressed, transformed)engaging you along the way, makes it all come alive – What help do you need?

Thank God for teachers. Jesus knows that anyone who would follow him would need teachers/teaching. No one has their act completely together

It stands out to me that of all the things the disciples could ask Jesus for, it's not a small thing that they ask Jesus to teach them to pray.

The good news for us is that Jesus takes their request for teaching, and he answers it! What he shares with them is for everyone who will follow Him. I feel like I have so much to learn, so much room to grow, and so I am in the same position as those disciples.

Male, female; new believer, mature believer, kid, senior adult, Bible expert or novice, doesn’t matter if you’re wealthy or you don’t really have any money. Jesus has interest in teaching or reteaching you to pray.

The kind of teaching that Jesus does here is less about cramming a bunch of facts for a test, and regurgitating the info. No one is asking, “Will this be on the test?” And more like an apprentice giving you a trade or a skill.

This teaching is something you PUT INTO PRACTICE. Have you learned HOW to do this?

As Jesus seeks to teach us, here's how he helps with prayer. I want to frame this message with three questions that Jesus answers.

Question #1 – WHAT SHOULD I BE ASKING FOR?

That’s a fair question. Are there requests that are out of bounds? Things in bounds? Is there a script, laundry list, mainly asking for things for me, really should never be about me. What should I be asking for?

Jesus gives us actual words to say (when you pray say this), requests you can always make to God (your Father). If you’re thinking, I don’t know where to start/restart (if your relationship with God has grown stale when it comes to prayer). 5 requests it will always be good to make. We’ll name them quickly, then sit down in them for a minute.

See those specific requests in verses 2-4? The prayer starts with GOD

your name be honored as holy – God's name, reputation, character honored, that he might reveal who he is

Your kingdom come – set the world to the way it should be under your rule and your reign

It will always be right to pray with those 2 ends in mind.

The prayer moves to US – our needs, our sin, our spiritual safety

Give us daily bread – Keeping us alive with what we needForgive us our sins – Keep us forgiven and forgivingDo not bring us into temptation – It’s a dangerous world out there, keep us safe from ourselves and the evil one

There will never be a bad or wrong time to pray any of these.

So, we have a place to start, we have actual words to say. I know some people have treated these almost like magical words. That’s not what our Lord had in mind. But these words can focus our thoughts. We can slow down, mean every last word (article, prep phrase).

Actually I think we can go further as well. These requests are portable. You could memorize these.

These words form a pattern for requests. We can expand on them. When you're stuck, you have words to say.

This helps overcome any ignorance. Jesus looks at fishermen, tax collectors who ask for His help and he helps them. Jesus wants us to pray.

Thinking about prayer through this lens may also help you navigate whether you’re treating God more like a genie or a Heavenly Father.

Is prayer just the mechanism to get whatever my selfish heart wants? Is it just a formula? I sense these requests can give us some help and really freedom. These requests take the relationship deeper!

I can’t meet all my needs relying 100% on my own resources/ability, but he is happy for me to look to him to provide for me

My soul, life, wellbeing needs guarding, and his character is that he looks after his own. So you move toward him.

I go to him as a sinner, he shows mercy and grace, absorbs sin, makes sure the injustice is dealt with, and forgives.

I have no higher agenda than your name being set apart. Act in such a way where people see who YOU are, your character. I want your rule and reign on earth. The world is a better place because you’re in charge. Show us that you’re in charge. In all this, I am actually deepening a relationship

So, you see what Jesus is teaching, can you put it into practice? We have 5 requests/filters to take life through. Let’s try to put it into practice.

Write down 2-3 things that really are occupying your attention (bad, good, intense/dull, short-term, long-term, personal, or others related). Grief, pain, loss, confusion, uncertainty, ambition, hopes, plans, endurance, wisdom.

How might these 5 requests you can always make apply to the situation you just thought about?

Uncertain, a life change coming – to honor/hallow His name

Deep sense of holy ambition for the coming year – God I want your rule and reign

Relationship that’s taken a tough turn (people have done wrong) – I’ve sinned, forgive me Lord, They’ve sinned; help me extend forgiveness.

Family member is getting crushed. Give them today exactly what they need. Protect their soul from danger

You will know you have learned the lesson Jesus wants you to learn, when you actually pray, but his lesson isn’t over here. The Lord’s Prayer isn’t detached. Jesus gives us 5 requests, but he knows our hearts. We’re human. We wrestle with doubt. Can I really come to God in prayer? Does it really work to ask Him for things?

In his teaching, Jesus helps answer another question we bring to prayer

Question #2 – HOW SHOULD I APPROACH GOD?

Not just what should I be asking, but HOW should I approach God? Humility is always a good thing, but it’s easy to have a lot of self-doubt (do I really belong here?)

Do I need to accrue some stock in God’s book, some relational collateral, is it pretty formal (think like I am writing a grant proposal),

is it all in the timing – wait for the big moment

Is it quality over quantity – make as few requests as possible, make them really count.

Jesus helps us in our approach by giving us a mental image of a bold friend in need.

In 5-8, we have a setting (not really suburban life in the West). Jesus is saying picture this – picture yourself middle of the night knocking at your friend’s door with an urgent hospitality concern. You say to your sleepy friend, “You’ve got to help me. Company just showed up unexpectedly. I need to give them food. I am all out. What do you have?”

Culture demands you go knock on that door, make a midnight request, despite the time, despite any thought of inconvenience. There’s a need. Someone has to help. And so, you knock.

Then, your friend who you just woke up may be sleepy/grumpy and may not want to mess with you, but there you are, and there’s no doubt culturally speaking in this story as to what’s going to happen. Your friend is going to do the right thing.

8I tell you, even though he won’t get up and give him anything because he is his friend, yet because of his friend’s shameless boldness, he will get up and give him as much as he needs.

That’s how you approach. Bold in asking. The words are “shameless boldness.”

For me that level of boldness doesn’t feel natural. If you grew up even a tad bit self-sufficient, there’s something that doesn’t feel right about asking someone. Jesus may have to go to work on our hearts, helping us unlearn and relearn some basics here.

Jesus reminds us – I’ve told you what to ask for. I just have to remember that. My approach can be a simple one. Like you, I have friends that have told me (and I am 100% sure they mean it), JUST ASK!! And if I don’t, they’ll say, why didn’t you ask. It’s almost insulting not to ask.

Is your approach that bold?

Or is it more like you’re at an office, and you don’t know the drill, do you get a number, do you get in line, go to the desk, which line, so there you are and you’re timid. there’s a lack of confidence – you just aren’t sure exactly how it’s going to work here. You know there’s a chance you could be made to feel like a moron.

Jesus is doing what He can to make sure you realize this isn’t that.

This picture is meant to help us appreciate a very different kind of approach. Verses 9-10 expand further. As disciples of Jesus we already have 5 requests we can make. But now we’re told to ask, seek, knock. A picture of prayer as a gift, pursuit, access. Jesus is teaching us to pray.

Clearly, you need things that only God can give (Ask!)Clearly you haven’t arrived. You need your Father, so seek!Clearly, God wants more than formalities. You were made for access to a deeper relationship with God so go ahead and knock.

Can we see what Jesus was doing in teaching us these things, where he was pointing us with the illustration?

You see what Jesus is teaching, can you put it into practice? In light of those 5 requests, and the teaching from our Lord that He wants you to ask boldly, you will know you have learned what he wants you to learn, when you actually pray, but the lesson isn’t over yet.

In this passage, Jesus answers one more question, and it isn’t about approach as much as it’s about reception.

Question #3 – HOW WILL MY REQUESTS BE RECEIVED BY GOD?

What does God do with my requests? Put them in a queue, answering them in the order received, prioritizing the good people, or the really big requests. Is there a quota? How will my requests be received by God?

Jesus has set us up to appreciate a contrast. We had a grumpy, sleepy friend. God isn’t like that! Actually, your experience of prayer with the Heavenly Father will be different from a person who gives something only because he just doesn’t want to be bothered. The contrast is even clearer in verses 11-13.

11What father among you, if his son asks for a fish, will give him a snake instead of a fish? 12Or if he asks for an egg, will give him a scorpion? 13If you then, who are evil, know how to give good gifts to your children, how much more will the heavenly Father give the Holy Spirit to those who ask him?”

God is better than the sleepy friend at midnight. God is better than a mediocre dad who still can give a decent gift on occasion.

Jesus uses the IMAGE OF A GENEROUS FATHER. He reminds us that “You are evil (human), but even give good gifts.” So, on my best day as an earthly Father, I have serious limits.

I am limited in my attitude – if my kids catch me in a cranky moodI am limited in what I can give – how much $ I have, if funds are tightI am limited in what I know – would this really be the perfect giftI am limited in how much I care – I still can be selfish. I go shopping for them, and buy something for me.

But, if all the planets align – IF you ask when it's the right time, catch me in the right mood. And you ask in the right way for the right thing, I just might come through.  Once a year, I think I might get close to this picture in Luke 11 of a generous father. Vacation Dad: Throw it in the cart.

I know my example breaks down. God is so different from us. Jesus says HOW MUCH MORE. This helps overcome any reluctance. Any cynicism.

So much more to be studied, so much more we could say.

You can appreciate that the TRINITY is at work in v13 reminding us of the generous heart of God. We have God the Son, telling his followers how to pray to the Father, and the answer and gift will be the Holy Spirit. God will give us the gift of the Holy Spirit. Jesus said, “I am not going to leave you alone. I will be with you. I will send my Spirit to you”

The Holy Spirit is the personal, real presence of Jesus, not a force, an energy or a feeling, but a person with us. This is exactly what we need. Think again of the requests, think again of asking, seeking, knocking, especially in light of the promised answer of the Holy Spirit.

You pray for God the Father/Son to be honored – the Spirit works on earth to do that.

You pray for forgiveness – the Spirit points you to Jesus, applying His work, bringing it to full completion in your life

You ask for spiritual protection – the Spirit seals your heart, guarding you to redemption

You are seeking, in pursuit/quest – the Holy Spirit is your guide. There will be truth that you need to know, so you seek  and the Spirit leads you into the truth

You need access, the door opened to God – the Holy Spirit provides access through Jesus. We pray IN the Spirit.

How much more will the heavenly Father give the Holy Spirit to those who ask him?

CONCLUSION

Can I remind you that Jesus didn’t just want his teaching here to be studied? How can we put into practice what we’ve learned?

1. Pray more specifically. Take the 5 requests you can always make (his name, kingdom, provision, forgiveness, protection) and see how they apply to your particular situation. In light of those 5 requests, make a specific request. It may help you to write it down. Remind yourself at the beginning and the end of your prayer of the generous heart of God the Father.

2. Pray together this week.

3. Sign up for monthly prayer prompts. (brainerdbaptist.org/connection)

4. Pray right now.  We can take time to pray right now!

Father, you don’t hear us because we pile on a lot of words, or because we’ve been well-behaved children. You hear us because of the work of your Son. We pray in His name that any reluctance or cynicism we have which would keep us from praying would be overcome by confidence in your good heart toward us. Grow our dependence on you in such a way that you set apart Your name on this earth. For the glory of Jesus we pray. Amen.

<><><><><>

1.4.2026  Brainerd (Sunday AM)