GOD’S WORK | OUR WORKBURDENS & A BIG PRAYERPSALM 90:12-17

Today’s teaching time will be different. Over the next 5 weeks, I want to share some burdens I believe the Lord is calling us together to share, and some direction I sense the Lord is calling us to walk together in light of those burdens. Most weeks we take God’s word and try to apply it to our lives personally/individually. For the next few weeks, I want us to think about our calling together, why God has brought you to Brainerd or kept you here, and where He’s leading us. Let’s start by praying “open-handed.”   → PRAYER

Can you use your imagination with me? Somewhere, someone has a Chattanooga–adjacent address (or will have one!).

You can imagine this person to be a student, senior adult, young professional, middle age.

I know we’re talking imagination, but what we know from the past is that God works in people. And God CHANGES them (Illustration). God changes them for the better, to be the person they were meant to be. Through the work of Jesus’ cross/resurrection and the ongoing work of the Holy Spirit, people are never the same.

Habits, who they see themselves to be (identity), lifestyles, desires, pursuits, homes, generations, marriage, addictions, whether they are agnostic, atheist, pretty decent individuals.

God changes people! Not all super neat, clean tidy, some things will take a while. That’s so exciting to think about.

I’ve asked you to imagine someone now, but actually this is the way Acts describes God working in the past

Acts 2 – repent/believe, saved, experience forgiveness, receive baptism (an outward expression of something happening on the inside)

Chapter after chapter – seeing Jesus as the Savior, relying on him, being changed, experiencing grace and joy

Acts 9 – a man named Saul has his eyes opened, forever changed (ambition, hopes, fears, dreams, values, meaning)

More and more people are changed in Acts. Imagine that happening here in Chattanooga. The way the rest of the epistles describe it.

New creation, regeneration, reborn; death to life, darkness to light, enemy to friend, outsider to belonging. Changed!

Imagine what God will do!  That’s happened to you. Some of you, it’s been recent. You’ve been changed through what Jesus has done.

That would be a beautiful story in itself, but that is nowhere near all that God has in store for these people we’re imagining. There’s more: God will move in such a way where this person who has been changed (whole life change) will be gathered with other followers around Jesus. Jesus is what brings them together. Jesus is what connects them and keeps them together.  [Illustration – a people are gathered around Jesus]

Not just a memory of who Jesus was, but actually the personally alive, ruling, and reigning Jesus. Gathered around Him.

Gathered = “Start going to church.” Yeah, but it’s so much more than that. Not just like a required meeting you have to go to because it’s part of the deal. Yes gathering at church. Singing, praying, talking, talking with people who you love and love you, staying after church.

But also gathering in smaller groups, home, lunches, coffees, trip to the store, hikes, Saturday on the lake, camping trips.

A changed person brought into friends around Jesus. This person that on the other side of the cross had none of this.

General desire in our culture that people have is to “find community.”

Yes, but I wonder if we think there’s this special friend group where it will be perfect. Lewis and Clark, discover it.

Partner to create it: Committed to each other growing in the Lord, loyal love and sacrifice, bearing with each other in the hard and inconvenient stuff, talking partners through confusing stuff.

Again, I am talking about something that I believe very well will happen in 2026 in Chattanooga, but it’s also the way Acts describes things in history

The church in Jerusalem starts meeting, devotion to each other around Jesus, big weekly meetings like this (with some formalities), but smaller meetings, hundreds, thousands/millions of them, identify with each other, meet with each other, love each other, partner with each other, do life together, invested, help take care of each other

Groups of partnership in so many different cities

Antioch – identifiable gathered group, and as they gather they grow together, grow closer, but they grow in following Jesus (learning, lives are being shaped by being around believers)

Philippi –gathered group, and as they gather they grow togetherThessalonica –gathered group, and as they gather they grow togetherEphesus/Rome –gathered group, growing together

The way the rest of the epistles describe it.

One another language – Truckload of “one-anothers”  [a lot of y’all’s]

Growth language – Growing in grace/knowledge/maturity

To be a part of something special like that would touch every single one of us very deeply. Even as we imagine that, we’re still not done:

God takes this person who He has changed and is changing, and this person who is gathered and gathering with other Christians around Jesus, and God calls call him/her to a deep purpose

God calls people (illustration). The people he has changed, the people who he has gathered, are also called.

Arrow means life isn’t about you, it’s about God and his purposes, about neighbors being loved and disciples being made.

You aren’t your own. You are a living sacrifice.

We’re called to serve each other, but we’re also called to go to people in the darkness, and be intentional about them seeing Jesus. That’s exactly the way Acts and so many places in the Bible describe the first church.

This gathering is on mission: People like Epaphras, Priscilla, Aquila, Lydia, Timothy (mom/grandma), Junia, Titus, Luke, Silas, Barnabas. They don’t just go to church. They see their lives (not all our pastors) as part of the mission of God.

Every Christian is used by God, different gifts, different callings, singles, married, men/women, new Christians, mature Christians, wealthy/poor

Take a moment and pull it all together. Here’s what we’re talking about: People being changed, gathered and called.

That’s what I believe God is up to in our world

News headlines will come, and they will all seem so very important (and often they are), but it makes it easy to forget there’s something beyond that. This team will play that team, this reel will make us laugh, this show will make us cry, and there will always be another one to watch. A world beyond that that will last forever.

People experiencing the amazing, undeserved favor of God. The faithful and loyal love, mercy, compassion. Multi-faceted grace (Peter’s word). Amazing (John Newton’s word). Rich in mercy (Paul’s world); what kind of love (John’s expression). Imagine people experiencing that.

In 2007, I became a senior pastor and learned a new question. Pastor what’s your vision for our church. It’s not a bad question. But often what I’ve learned is that in America, often the expected answer is

New building, slogan, program [study guides, website]Event, platform, marketing campaign

Value in vision clarity, but we’re driven by something much better: people

Somewhere we know people who need Jesus, need grace. Who need what the Lord has done for us. How deeply I want this for people. That’s the vision, that’s the heartbeat.

In some ways it seems so unoriginal, which is true. It’s universal. Last Sunday, I met with believers in SE Asia, right in the heart of an Islamic context. Most were in their 20’s. What a treat. This past week, I met a couple of church leaders in a busy city in Asia. Caring for an international church. My heart is with them, in a sense. My heart is here, with you.

I am praying that God will use Brainerd. He will use US. I came across the language of having a “big prayer.” More than a mission/vision statement or core values. Something we could ask God for together. But it is a rallying cry for a team, a group of people, a church.

What if through the Spirit’s work in our efforts together, we watched firsthand as the grace of Jesus sat down in more and more people’s lives. Big prayer, but one worth praying. BIG PRAYER

Why “more (and more)”?  Because God’s kingdom grows.

Not to mention: People are coming to us. God sends them, God sent you, and you ended up here. What good reasons might God have in bringing you to us. We could have new friendships and relationships.

Neighbors, friends, kids, family. Keeps expanding. This church is all about people. If people need Jesus, why would we not want more and more people to meet Him

Would personally experience all the grace God has for them [in being changed, being gathered, being called].

In March, or September, a person has a spiritual earthquake in their lives, or it’s like a light switch on a dimmer, gradually comes together. We want them to experience grace.

They/you aren’t just customers to be managed by Customer Relationship Management software. Linger on a list of names who’ve filled out a card, or repeated a prayer, or just added to a subscription list, but what if they begin to gather with us as a church. Identify through baptism, weekly meet with friends, throughout the week, spend more and more time. Embrace God may use us together.

Would personally enjoy all the grace God has for them [in being changed, being gathered, being called]. Tasted and saw that the Lord was good.

What if we got new friends. Our lives were more and more enriched. After a dinner/lunch together, our hearts were fuller.

Hear this big prayer many times over the coming days. Not so much a catchphrase, but as a real prayer we can pray together to a great big God.

I want to expand on what that means for us over the next few weeks. Isn’t that the driving heartbeat? More and more people that God loves.

More than a brand we’re trying to gain market share.More than a group to be occasionally associated withMore than trying to maintain organizational/ institutional viability.

We are the church of Jesus. Because we’re deeply invested in God’s Work in the lives of people, we sense God has given us work to do.

Most of the time, we start with Scripture. Today, I want to actually end with it. The Lord directed my attention to Psalm 90 toward the end of last year, and it has really had an effect on me. I believe this is what we need to hear as a church

12Teach us to number our days carefully so that we may develop wisdom in our hearts.

Every single day matters. Yet, we don’t always see it. We get so lost in the rat race, we don’t see it and so we can get off track. Lord, TEACH us to view time carefully.

13Lord—how long? Turn and have compassion on your servants.

Life can be hard we find ourselves sighing “how long,” and so we pray. We need your compassion and help.

14Satisfy us in the morning with your faithful love so that we may shout with joy and be glad all our days.

Not only experiencing grace, but enjoying His faithful love. Alarm clock goes off. Another day. Another day we can be satisfied.

We have what we need. We have a God who loves us, provides for us.Loved, in community, cared for well.Shout for joy, sing for joy. Be glad. Smile as we pray. Food yet again. God you did it again. SATISFY us.

15Make us rejoice for as many days as you have humbled us, for as many years as we have seen adversity.

No blind eye to the hardship. Joy comes in the humbling time (life gets more complicated). Adversity = when we lose more than we win.

MAKE us rejoice. We trust, we grow, we get closer to the Lord, we don’t fall away. We trust his heart. We depend on him more. We love him. He’s good. We walk the hard road, and we find a companion on that road that never leaves us, never forsakes us.

We recognize God has work he’s doing. he is up to some things.

16Let your work be seen by your servants, and your splendor by their children.

We serve God. We want to see what He’s doing. His kingdom expands. We see it. Light goes into dark spaces, and we see it.

Splendor - His perfect love and his complete sovereign power. The splendor of his unwavering faithfulness, and patience. The glory of his omnicompetence and his omniscience. His total wisdom.

To the point our kids see it. Our grandkids (maybe unborn grandkids and great nephews and nieces) they will see it. Another generation walking with Jesus long after we’re gone. God we want you to work, and we don’t want to miss it. We want the world to see it.

17Let the favor of the Lord our God be on us; establish for us the work of our hands— establish the work of our hands!

There’s God’s work. But then notice the last big prayers of Psalm 90. Let the favor of the Lord our God rest on us. His grace in our lives. his grace experienced. his grace enjoyed.

Another prayer: establish OUR work. God’s works, but he’s called us to work as well. Our work is joining Him in his work. We don’t create, he does, but we take what He has created and we give our lives to develop, expand, push further what He’s done.  God’s Work | Our Work.  Establish the work you’ve called us to do.

Brainerd, God is working AND he is calling us to do work. God’s Work, Our Work, that’s at the heart of what we need to spend some time looking at.

I’ve tried to spend some time this morning looking at what God is doing. That’s the engine that drives our church. But over the next few weeks, I want to connect that with the work God is calling us to do.

For the next few weeks.

I would love for you to make it a priority to attend. If you can’t we do have each week’s message on a podcast as well as YouTube.

Pray for clarity as I share. I really need that.

Ask the Lord to open your heart, so it’s not as if you’re wondering what “the church” is up to, but you actually see a special work that God may do in your life individually, as we seek what he wants for us together.

<><><><><>

1.18.2026    Brainerd Baptist Church