COMPLETE IN CHRIST Peace and the Word COLOSSIANS 3:12-17

INTRO: Congratulations, you get to be a consultant/life coach for a day. So, you walk into the boardroom, locker room, family room, and you ask questions, observe, listen, tuck things away.

What kind of culture is this? What wins here? What’s decisive? What gets priority? What is very noticeable? What do people talk about? What do people tolerate? What do people celebrate?

If you assessed Brainerd, I wonder what would you would notice

What drives here? What wins here? What is the culture like here? What are we aiming for here? Beyond slogans, but actions and behaviors.

So many of you are not OUTSIDERS but INSIDERS in the family of God. You aren’t just observing, you’re participating. You have a stake here, you are part of shaping our culture, which is why Colossians 3 speaks loudly.

Colossians describes something that has happened to us, The best way to say it is we are with Christ (diagram from last week). We have died with Christ (so we’re learning to put some things to death), buried with Christ (in Baptism), raised with Christ (new life), hidden with Christ now, one day we will appear with Christ. That’s who you are. Deep description.

Now it’s time to build on that.

12Therefore, as God’s chosen ones, holy and dearly loved,

Those are loaded words going all the way back to ancient Israel. (Deut 7)

6You are a holy people belonging to the Lord your God. The Lord your God has chosen you…7The Lord had his heart set on you and chose you….

Whoever believes in Jesus is now grafted into the people of God. You are set apart for God’s purposes, you are marked out by His love for you.

We also can’t miss the plural. He’s not talking to just you, but he’s actually pushing against our individualistic culture! it isn’t just about you maximizing your spiritual productivity for Jesus. It’s about the people of God

And to be clear, the first readers wouldn’t have just assumed Paul was talking about a bunch of Christians in general. This was likely a house church. You’re looking eye to eye at the people who are Christians.

At Brainerd, we have a lot more people than that house church, but the principles don’t change do they? We are the chosen, holy, and dearly loved. If we really are God’s people together, what should our interpersonal relationships look like? We have an answer from Scripture.

12Therefore, as God’s chosen ones, holy and dearly loved, put on compassion, kindness, humility, gentleness, and patience, 13bearing with one another and forgiving one another if anyone has a grievance against another. Just as the Lord has forgiven you, so you are also to forgive. 14Above all, put on love, which is the perfect bond of unity. 15And let the peace of Christ, to which you were also called in one body, rule your hearts. And be thankful.

So if you were to look inside the interpersonal relationships of our church,

The PEACE OF CHRIST should RULE OUR HEARTS

Such a powerful word: Let the peace of Christ rule your hearts (15)

For a lot of years, I had this wrong. “I try to have a peace in my heart about things, especially big decisions.” It’s good to have some internal confirmation, but that isn’t what this is referring to.

“your hearts” is plural, the context of this peace is togetherness

PEACE = Christ has come to bring peace or shalom to this world (wholeness, harmony, unity around goodness, togetherness, everything and everyone in sync)

the United Nations surely can’t do that, the Olympics can’t completely do that, but Jesus Christ will do that one day. It’s his peace.

And right now, there is an outpost of that on earth where you get an (incomplete) snapshot of what’s coming through the church

How do we get to the place where we live together with that kind of peace?

The picture is close proximity. If you’re going to live where Christ wants you, it will involve relationships like these. And very frankly it can be very challenging to live with other Christians, and you have no other option of living out what it means to be a follower of Jesus.

What do you need? Go back to verse 12 to see what you put on (almost like a coat or a jacket)

Compassion – your heart goes out (needs/suffering, sympathy) Kindness – disposition to do good and respond Humility – equal value, not better than others Gentleness – not harsh in dealings with others (a time for directness) Patience– not being irritated, time component

That’s such a helpful, important set of qualities. If you’re tempted to think Paul’s gone soft (culture doesn’t always see these as positive, but full strength, take aim at everyone, take no prisoners, calling people out)

He is in prison for his convictions, and in prison he’s been writing something that’s convictional, courageous and even confrontational

These are qualities of Jesus [moved with compassion, exercises kindness (he doesn’t take things at their breaking point and just demolish them), in humility he becomes a man, obedient to death, gentle (even as he’s direct with his disciples – you never hear it get personal), and there seems like there’s a patient willingness for people to turn (even as Jerusalem is turning on Jesus – how long have I wept for you.]  Jesus isn’t exactly “soft.”

Do you know how “hard” it is exercise these things. The self-control to actually endure, be patient, even die to your preferences, the humility to realize “I might’ve been wrong in my first assessment”

Not just a disposition, but real actions in verse 13 – bear with / forgive

Bearing with is true “tolerance,” next level is forgiveness.

This passage doesn’t assume life is easy, no problems, or if there are potential things to bear with, it’s just a big misunderstanding and we should quickly get over it. Doesn’t assume there won’t be some times to speak truth (we can come back to that).

But, it does assume there will be regular causes to forgive, bear with: talk too much, awkward, insecurities will show, needy, fairly self-absorbed, drift into complaining, over time becomes pretty frustrating

You could make a decision to think the worst, but the peace of Christ means you don’t. We don’t overlook bad actors, if you write out everyone who ever makes life a tad bit difficult for you (I wonder where your friendships and family life will be in a couple of years).

Sure, they probably could’ve been more thoughtful, empathetic. Sure, you may have to be the bigger person, and you might be tired of them

Notice forgiveness is tied to Jesus (just as he has forgiven you). And also love kicks in (14).

14Above all, put on love, which is the perfect bond of unity.

God is love, so this will be a priority. This bonds us together, we are called to one body, and love holds us together. These are the qualities which then launch us into verse 15: Let the peace of Christ rule.

With significant caveats, here’s the decisive factor or standard: what gives us the best chance of enjoying true peace of Jesus here?

It’s one thing to assess what sacrifices it takes when you’re called on to forgive, be patient, bear with. But for a minute could you remember what it’s like to be on the receiving end. [that’s not always easy, because we have some self-serving excuses for our behavior to cover our tails – tough day, it’s kind of your fault, if you knew how long…]

Peel all that way: think about the many times that you’ve been shown compassion, forgiveness, humility

Recognized you when they didn’t have to, “let me see what I can do” Asked a second question because they cared – are you doing alright Downer, or full of yourself, just immature, abrasive or contrarian

Verse 15 ends “Be thankful” – of course! How could I be anything but thankful when so many have loved me so well.

When that happens, it’s as if Jesus with all of the shalom He brings is ruling His church, ruling our hearts. Jesus himself is showing his compassion to us. We’re not waiting for the rule of Jesus, we’re experiencing it.  All sorts of interpersonal interactions. What rules here? Does the peace of Christ rule at Brainerd Baptist Church?

When I read what’s next, we’re growing beyond interpersonal relationships, and more of the church actually coming together, meeting together (big meetings, smaller groups, 1-1). What will distinguish our culture as we gather together? What’s dominant?

There are lots of social clubs our there (what new gadget we got, sorting through the real “status” of each person), surface level (weather). What is the glue/adhesive holding us together or switching metaphors the aroma of us meeting together

16Let the word of Christ dwell richly among you, in all wisdom teaching and admonishing one another through psalms, hymns, and spiritual songs, singing to God with gratitude in your hearts.

Another sign of the right kind of culture is when

The WORD OF CHRIST DWELLS RICHLY AMONG US

Let the word dwell richly among you. We’re still reading plural.

This isn’t just your devotions, quiet times, Bible reading, meditation, hiding it in your heart – Yes, do that.

Word dwelling in all of us, which doesn’t exactly mean that everyone becomes brainiac Bible scholars. But it does assume wide participation.

The influence of the message, the words of Jesus run deep. I love this!

There is a mysterious side of Jesus that we won’t be able to fully diagram/comprehend. But we recognize that Jesus feeds, sustains, protects, provides, guides, commissions and he does so with clarity BY HIS WORDS, by his MESSAGE.  We aren’t waiting on cloud formations to know what He’s thinking.

A biblical scholar, Eugene Peterson wrote a paraphrase of the whole Bible, and when he came to this verse he said something like this:

Let the Word of Christ—the Message—have the run of the house. Give it plenty of room in your lives.

The message of Christ should be making itself at home

When people buy a house, often everything changes (functionality, style). Because a new person really dwells there

Richly dwelling – just something over the top

house where someone collects something, or pictures of kids and grandkids, or “books” (hypothetically speaking). Maybe someone looks at it and goes (that’s a bit overkill). And they may be right, but what is clear is that YOU are dwelling there.

Richly = all the resources and blessings attached to the words of Jesus. This is not just an occasional Bible reference. This is you being consumed.

The idea is that in the community of Jesus there are lots of regular, ongoing conversations (one another – not just the role of the pastor or great Bible teachers. This is the role of all of us having an assignment to use God’s Word helpfully as we speak to other people).

Probably a place where people mess this up, where they aren’t really connected, but they just pridefully lob Bible verses at people.

But never have I thought “She is just way too effective at using God’s Word to help another person think through their life situations. We could really use less of that right now.” That would be crazy.

Actually, when the word of Christ is handled and full of all kinds of wisdom, and it moves beyond a collection of facts, how do you apply (wisdom comes when you listen, understand, gain experience over time). That’s such a helpful thing, and I can’t imagine you living without it.

How constructive we can be for each other as we teach.

Of course there’s the formal, facilitated teaching. But this is pushing into a whole lot of informal (texts, calls, conversations after church). We aren’t know-it-all’s but we can help each other, and we need to.

And then there’s the admonishing/warning – cautionary. Sometimes, we’re in something so deeply, and it’s damaging, we’re changing (not for the better), and someone outside our headspace gives us a warning, taking the Word of Jesus and using it for our benefit.

The word of Christ is making itself at home. I don’t hear the audible voice of Jesus, but I don’t have to. He’s just as real.

Singing in our heart. Again, we sing to God, but the context is us being together, it’s us in the corporate setting. So, this kind of singing isn’t just you and the Lord.

Songs have a catalytic effect – not just the singing that might be coming off the stage, but you singing where you are, with the voice God gave you, flowing out with joy.

It Is Well, 10,000 Reasons, Because He Lives, Thank You Jesus

I haven’t found where singing is a specific kind of spiritual gift doled out to just a few, it’s actually an expected action for the people of God.

Again, it’s one thing to assess what changes you need to make to be more engaged with the Word in other peoples’ lives. That’s so beneficial. But as a starting point, for a minute could you remember what it’s like to be on the receiving end of God’s Word handled well..

Spoke a courageous difficult cautionary Word at a pivotal season Explained something important and it became clear to you Framed your life on the truth, solid teaching Brought a song, or reminded you of a song

Verse 16 ends where verse 15 ends. Tons of gratitude. Of course you will be grateful in your hearts.

CONCLUSION: Ends with a sweeping summary.

17And whatever you do, in word or in deed, do everything in the name of the Lord Jesus, giving thanks to God the Father through him.

We will have more to say on that next week, but we’re talking every detail (words, actions, all of it) is done with Jesus our master in mind.

This section ends with another verse about giving thanks (3 vs. in a row)

In a world of “that’s your job” mindset, entitlement, etc.

Shouldn’t that define the culture of our church. Dozens and dozens of “thank you’s” throughout the week.

The peace of Christ ruling. The Word of Christ dwelling. That’s the culture Jesus is creating in our church.

<><><><><>

5.10.2026    Brainerd Baptist Church