BEHIND THE SCENES CHOOSING TO REMEMBER ESTHER 9-10

INTRODUCTION: Humans remember things. Or we definitely try to remember things. Memories can fade. So, we do some other things

Take pictures/videos         tell stories      traditions Trophies/Souvenirs           Dates on the calendar – 9/11 Historical Markers/Documentaries

All these things serve to help us remember, and thinking about how people remember matters because we’re right at the finish line of Esther [Series Slide]. As we close our study, one of the last special gifts we receive from this amazing book is remembering how important remembering is.

We can jog our memories quickly with where we’ve been in Esther

In Susa/Persia, people like Esther/Mordecai find themselves in very challenging places.  We’ve pulled threads, encountered  what evil looks like, the challenges evil poses.

We’ve seen Esther move from being vulnerable to becoming a lady willing to perish, because she recognized that she might have been born for this moment. Through a “coincidence storm,” we’ve seen complete reversal of Haman and all of the Jews’ enemies.

Today we’re going to spend most of our time in Esther 9, and see (1) how a victory is finalized, and (2) how this moment in time will be remembered

As we read, I want you to notice the details and appreciate the difficulties

9:1–2 1The king’s command and law went into effect on the thirteenth day of the twelfth month, the month Adar. On the day when the Jews’ enemies had hoped to overpower them, just the opposite happened. The Jews overpowered those who hated them. 2In each of King Ahasuerus’s provinces the Jews assembled in their cities to attack those who intended to harm them. Not a single person could withstand them; fear of them fell on every nationality.

Notice also the advancement of Mordecai

9:3–4 3All the officials of the provinces, the satraps, the governors, and the royal civil administrators aided the Jews because they feared Mordecai. 4For Mordecai exercised great power in the palace, and his fame spread throughout the provinces as he became more and more powerful.

10:2–3 …his powerful, magnificent accomplishments…great rank… king honored him… second only to King Ahasuerus…. famous among the Jews, highly esteemed. He continued to pursue prosperity for his people and to speak for the well-being of all his descendants.

Mordecai ascends to power. Then, we start to hear how the battle went. The casualty count piles up (even if the text doesn’t go into detail.

5The Jews put all their enemies to the sword, killing and destroying them. They did what they pleased to those who hated them. 6In the fortress of Susa the Jews killed and destroyed 500 men, 7including Parshandatha, Dalphon, Aspatha, 8Poratha, Adalia, Aridatha, 9Parmashta, Arisai, Aridai, and Vaizatha. 10They killed these ten sons of Haman son of Hammedatha, the enemy of the Jews. However, they did not seize any plunder.

Notice the identification, and the names of Haman’s sons, but there is this note that the Jews didn’t seize plunder.

There’s some back and forth with the king, and Esther senses there are still more enemies to deal with, so she asks for another day for Jews to be on the offensive in verse 13 and the king gives her one more day in 14.

9:15 15The Jews in Susa assembled again on the fourteenth day of the month of Adar and killed 300 men in Susa, but they did not seize any plunder. 16The rest of the Jews in the royal provinces assembled, defended themselves, and gained relief from their enemies. They killed 75000 of those who hated them, but they did not seize any plunder.

We understand the relief, but we also have to accept that this can be a difficult passage to read. These were brutal times and brutal actions.

You could be tempted to ask, “Is this necessary? Is this sanctioned? Should they have done this? Would you have done this?”

Those questions won’t be quickly answered. I’m not sure they can be fully answered this side of heaven. They certainly aren’t the main point of the book, but it’s worth spending just a moment here.

Can we put some things in context?

There has always seemed to be an irrational antisemitism, forms of irrational hatred of Jews even today.

Jews have often needed to have a consistent defensive posture. In Esther, there is a persistent real threat to Jews. Esther has to be told to hide her identity. Despite the reversal, there are still people ready to harm Jews. So, when all of this goes down, the Jews are not random aggressors. They are defending their lives.

Secondly, I read of a comparison. If it’s 1939 in Warsaw, and Jews in a ghetto have an opportunity for one day to attack Nazi SS officers. Does anyone fault them, knowing what’s coming?

Third, I do notice the emphasis on the fact that they didn’t take plunder. So, they weren’t trying to dominate over everyone, as much as they were trying to stay alive.

My conclusion – We read Esther for more than morals. At the end of the day, it still feels like a very brutal situation. It won’t be helpful to find a precedent (If you’re ever in situations where you need to ask for an extra day to kill all your enemies, then be like Esther)

And yet, God is at work in even the most awful situations. One day the Prince of Peace comes, and war is over. Even so come Lord Jesus

We see the final victory, but Esther has one last gift for us. As this book closes, you hear steady themes.

9:17 17They fought on the thirteenth day of the month of Adar and rested on the fourteenth, and it became a day of feasting and rejoicing.

9:20–28 20Mordecai recorded these events and sent letters to all the Jews in all of King Ahasuerus’s provinces, both near and far. 21He ordered them to celebrate the 14th and 15th days of the month of Adar every year 22because during those days the Jews gained relief from their enemies. That was the month when their sorrow was turned into rejoicing and their mourning into a holiday. They were to be days of feasting, rejoicing, and of sending gifts to one another and to the poor. 23So the Jews agreed to continue the practice they had begun, as Mordecai had written them to do. 24For Haman son of Hammedatha the Agagite, the enemy of all the Jews, had plotted against the Jews to destroy them. He cast the pur—that is, the lot—to crush and destroy them. 25But when the matter was brought before the king, he commanded by letter that the evil plan Haman had devised against the Jews return on his own head and that he should be hanged with his sons on the gallows. 26For this reason these days are called Purim, from the word pur. Because of all the instructions in this letter as well as what they had witnessed and what had happened to them, 27the Jews bound themselves, their descendants, and all who joined with them to a commitment that they would not fail to celebrate these two days each and every year according to the written instructions and according to the time appointed. 28These days are remembered and celebrated by every generation, family, province, and city, so that these days of Purim will not lose their significance in Jewish life and their memory will not fade from their descendants.

Do you see how this moment in time gets memorialized? The way the book ends caught my eye, especially three emphases that helps this sink into their memories.

Notice how the Jews are led to REHEARSE THE STORY

Because we’ve been in Esther for a while, we can appreciate all the ways this story played out, all the uncertainties of each moment. But these verses make the story explicit.

Haman plotting to destroy, casting the Pur/dice for a favorable time to take out the Jews. Then things turning on him.

They can rehearse all the things that had to happen for relief from enemies and reversal. There was emotion of sorrow —> rejoicing.

They rehearse the story and call all the days Purim, as an ironic name.

Mordecai also ensures they CARVE OUT PRACTICES to memorialize these days. In essence he’s saying, “People we’re going to do this.”

Marks out the 14th & 15th day, month of Adar (days of victory)

Words like rest/relief, feasting/rejoicing, holiday, sending gifts to each other, remembering the poor. In verse 31, there is fasting/lamentation attached to it.

Mordecai calls for a commitment to mark these days – “Jews bound themselves, their descendants, and all who joined with them to a commitment that they would not fail to celebrate these two days each and every year.”

I also notice how much they memorialize as they WRITE THINGS DOWN

Mordecai records, sends letters, give orders. (20,21, 23) He gives written instructions in his letters (26-27) Queen Esther writes a letter in 29. Mordecai collaborates with this in 30-31 to nail it down 32 – written into the record

13 verses, 9 of them, something is officially documented.

Can I pause for a moment. So for the past few weeks I’ve read a book called The Only Plane in the Sky: An Oral History of 9/11 (Garrett Graff).

Our mantra on 9/11 has been “never forget,” but while I think we don’t forget, I’m not sure we remember either. We know the facts of the day without remembering what it was like to experience the day with all its confusion, fear, and tragedy. My hope for the book will be that Americans are reminded how much 9/11 affected and shaped those who lived through it.

You can appreciate what that author is trying to do. It has the same ring to it as Esther. This moment is memorialized and all this with the goal

28These days are remembered and celebrated by every generation, family, province, and city, so that these days of Purim will not lose their significance in Jewish life and their memory will not fade from their descendants.

Do you hear what’s at stake:

No significance lost – No one goes, “What’s the big deal?” You end up filling in blanks: this matters to you because ______.

Memory won’t fade – No one has to ask “What even happened?” Because you remind them “this is exactly what happened.”

Esther helps us see the value of remembering, which gives us a very special opportunity. We’re going to end our study of Esther, not so much with remembering what she or Mordecai did, but with something you could put into practice.

Some activities and assignments are just life-draining chores, the equivalent to busy-work. But some assignments are life-giving practices, this would take some effort, but on the other side of this, it builds, grows, helps, serves.

With Esther, I want you to see the value of REHEARSING OUR STORIES

If you are a Christian, YOU have a story, and there’s actually different dimensions of that story.  There’s the gospel (good news) story. Exactly what Jesus did…

1 Corinthians 2:2 2I decided to know nothing among you except Jesus Christ and him crucified.

1 Corinthians 15:3–4 3For I passed on to you as most important what I also received: that Christ died for our sins according to the Scriptures, 4that he was buried, that he was raised on the third day according to the Scriptures,

Galatians 6:14 14But as for me, I will never boast about anything except the cross of our Lord Jesus Christ.

Hebrews 12:3 3For consider him who endured such hostility from sinners against himself, so that you won’t grow weary and give up.

This is our story. Our lives intersect this, so we take opportunities to rehearse this story. Remind ourselves of it. Realize all the things that come from being united to Jesus (reconciliation, atonement, being declared righteous, freedom, adoption).

We also have our own personal rescue story

Whoever calls on the name of the Lord will be saved. Events, family, crisis, led you to a moment for you to call on the Lord

Over time old things passed away, things become new. The direction of your life, decisions, formation of your priorities

God working all things together for good. faithfulness, patience, endurance

Are those things you think about on a regular basis?

Rehearsing our stories is valuable. CARVING OUT PRACTICES

Our Lord gave us baptism to remember. Someone makes a deliberate choice to publicly identify as a Christian, and the community comes together to recognize that

I also think of some seasonal practices (Advent, Lent, seasons of Christmas/Easter). Not mandated for Christians, but often, they help to put someone’s heart in the right place.

So many other things bring us together

We come together for the Lord’s Supper to remember as a group of believers. We remember his forgiveness.

As we come together in weekly worship. It’s not about perfect attendance, but being attentive to all the things that feed you: singing, prayers, teaching, people you see, conversations you have. It contributes to remembering

Daily rhythms also help us remember (read your Bible, pray, read books) that reset who you really are in the Lord. Identity shaping.

If it isn’t on the calendar, it doesn’t happen – a bit of an exaggeration to prove a point. But it doesn’t matter

You also could find value in WRITING THINGS DOWN. Some may have an immediate natural reaction thinking, “Curtis, I’m not a writer, I am not even a good speller.” No one is asking you to create an epic piece of writing.

I could see so much value on getting clear on major pivots, milestones, seasons, encounters in your life. Those matter. Could you write that down?

Some of you God has done generational change. Could you capture it somehow?

I know some people are going to be really good at journaling, hard-copy Bible, great with words, but I really do believe we all could start somewhere.

Of course, we could make excuses

Young – I don’t feel like my story is finished, very true, but isn’t there value in seeing the Lord’s hand so far.

You live pretty isolated – “No one would actually care.” I would love to see some of the isolation change, but even then, people do care.

I am too old. Could someone come alongside and help. Maybe it’s one sheet of paper, but that marks out another grace story.

I’ve wondered what some dedicated space in LifeGroups would be like if one person jotted some things down and prepared to share how God rescued them. There are friends who would be glad to hear it, who might need to hear it. Any of our pastors would count it a gift to hear your story.

Life comes around so fast. What are we doing to slow it down for a few minutes.  Let’s not leave Esther and miss how it ends. It ends by intentionally remembering, so much so that Jews still celebrate Purim even today. We have even more of God’s gracious work to remember.

<><><><><>

9.06.2026    Brainerd Baptist Church