SING TO THE LORD Selected Scriptures from Psalms

INTRO: Words are powerful. They help us do things. Sometimes, words themselves can actually DO things! Especially when it is God speaking! What should happen when God speaks, when he commands us to do something, what follows? What should be our response?

Because God says, “give and it will be given to you” —> do we give Love me with all your heart —> do we love? Come to me and I will give you rest —> do we come to him? Be holy, for I am holy —> are we holy?

One of the commands God gives is to SING to Him.

47:6-7 Sing praise to God, sing praise; sing praise to our King, sing praise! Sing a song of wisdom, for God is King of the whole earth.

This is a direct command, it’s repeated again and again and that will be our focus today [SING TO THE LORD].  So, what happens.

I don’t know whether singing to the Lord is a natural thing you do or not, or whether you really see that as part of God being who He is and you being who you are.

What I would love to see happen (if you’re not there already) is for singing not to just be in an optional category, or even in a duty category, but in a joyful response category. A happy response to who God is!

From early Genesis there is music, from Exodus to Revelation we hear the words of songs. God’s people sing!  What I really want to dial in today is what it means for God’s people to sing, and why we sing.

Psalms is a book of songs, still used for the people of God to worship, and today you’ll see how it’s not just calling you as an individual to sing, but for us, the people of God to sing.

And I find that what Psalms talks about is active participation – not just “I love to hear some good singing,” but “I love to sing.” The command is not to just “listen to music,” the command is to sing.

So, we will look at some verses in Psalms, process what they mean, process the categories they give us to sing

One of the primary reasons that God gave us singing is to walk with us through seasons of our lives. Psalm 13 speaks of the Lord showing faithful love even in tough seasons, and the Lord delivering. Then we hear it.

13:6 – I will sing to the Lord because he has treated me generously.

Psalm 42:8 The Lord will send his faithful love by day; his song will be with me in the night— a prayer to the God of my life.

I’ve known several people, in seasons of their evening when darkness would come, it would just be unusually tough. A song grips

57:7 My heart is confident, God, my heart is confident. I will sing; I will sing praises.

You hear a different tone. More on the front foot, full of confidence.

Ps 71 talks some about aging (literally turning gray), which is a very different season in life. Even there…

71:22Therefore, I will praise you with a harp for your faithfulness, my God; I will sing to you with a lyre, Holy One of Israel.

119:54 – Your statutes are the theme of my song during my earthly life.

Sing to PROCESS YOUR LIFE (before the Lord)

We go through life, and one of the real gifts that the Lord gives us to think through what’s going on, to interpret and evaluate our lives, to stabilize us,  is singing.

So, we take truth, we take reality, we apply it to our circumstances, and it gets set to music, and this does something.

There are nonsense songs, silly songs. But this is in a different category. This is true, this is real, this is right.

And it’s worth passing on. I appreciate some of the generational aspects of singing. Listen to Psalm 145

4One generation will declare your works to the next and will proclaim your mighty acts. 7They will give a testimony of your great goodness and will joyfully sing of your righteousness.

As a kid, I would sing: My God is so big, so strong and so mighty; He’s got the whole world in his hands; He’s still working on me. I was learning to process my life by singing.

We process our life with these kinds of songs (not just hearing them, but singing them.

When peace like a river attends my way, when sorrows like sea billows roll, whatever my lot, you’ve taught me to say, It is well with my soul.

My hope is built on nothing less than Jesus blood and righteousness, when darkness seems to hide his face, I rest on his unchanging grace

Summer and winter and springtime and harvest, strength for today, bright hope for tomorrow

Lord, I need you, every hour I need you.

What aspects of your life, your career, your family, your health would it be good to process today? Could singing help you there?

We sing to process life. But there’s more…

I’ve been reading a really good book. As far as I can tell, it’s not written by a Christian. The author seems like a really humble, grateful man, and he’s definitely grateful for people, but when it comes to bigger picture things, it seems like he constantly refers to luck. Who are you thankful to? I think he would shrug, and I just think how sad that is. When you have the Lord, that should change and does change.

Sam Crabtree says “Gratitude is the divinely given spiritual ability to see grace, and the corresponding desire to affirm it and its giver as good.” I love that description.

We could be blinded, but God helps us see grace. We could be stuck on ourselves, he gives us a desire to release our gratitude. As we receive good things, we just keep getting pointed back to God, and we say thanks.

I see that impulse regularly in the Psalms

7:17 I will thank the Lord for his righteousness; I will sing about the name of the Lord Most High.

28:7 The Lord is my strength and my shield; my heart trusts in him, and I am helped. Therefore my heart celebrates, and I give thanks to him with my song.

69:30 I will praise God’s name with song and exalt him with thanksgiving.

95:2 Let’s enter his presence with thanksgiving; let’s shout triumphantly to him in song.

We sing to SAY “THANKS” TO GOD.

We could say “thank you” in a prayer, and we should. And music adds more than that. There are layers of creativity, structure/order (patterns), beauty, and also there’s something memorable and repeatable about it

We come together and say the same thing. Your heart is full!

Gratitude is so important as a disciple of Jesus. I wonder if anything in our culture, distinguishes us quite like gratitude does. Imagine someone coming here dealing pain. They come into our gathering and they find people singing, saying thanks to God for how good He has been.

We sing to say “thanks” to God. Growing up, I remember singing “Thank you Lord for saving my soul” and “For all that you’ve done I will thank you, for all that you’re going to do.”

I also think of the times thanksgiving moves us into praise

Then sings my soul, my Savior, God to thee, how great thou art All my life you have been faithful, all my life you have been so, so Good

We sing to say “thanks” to God, to express our gratitude.

As you would expect, a lot of Christian music is celebratory. It’s upbeat, joyful. We praise, we give thanks

We sing joyful, joyful we adore thee Blessed assurance, perfect submission, perfect delight; all is at rest

There are lots of those kinds of experiences. But, we wouldn’t be honest if we didn’t recognize that big seasons of our life are more in a minor key. When life just seems to get heavier and heavier and it weighs on us.

Our bodies break down, Work blows up, our plans unravel Family gets sideways, a friend deals with painful circumstances

In those moments, the Lord doesn’t ask you to pretend that it’s not really heavy, or like you aren’t carrying a burden. Psalm 62 tells you to pour out your heart to the Lord.

Of course, I want you to know that there is a standing invitation to talk with a pastor, to pray with a pastor.

But God has also given you a gift, you can sing, and unburden your soul.

Psalm 42 might be one of those most helpful places in Scripture. It starts with deep commitment for the Lord (longing/thirsting)

As a deer longs for flowing streams, so I long for you, God. I thirst for God, the living God. My tears have been my food day and night, while all day long people say to me, “Where is your God?”

Internal questions – when do I get to speak in front of the Lord?

When can I come and appear before God?

There are tears – day and night, such an emotional situation, this was like my food. External questions – what is God doing in your life right now? Where is he?

I remember this as I pour out my heart: how I walked with many, leading the festive procession to the house of God, with joyful and thankful shouts.

He is still praying – “I pour out my heart. Remembers better days/times. He would enter into a gathered worship, and could be joyful/thankful.

Why, my soul, are you so dejected? Why are you in such turmoil? Put your hope in God, for I will still praise him, my Savior and my God.

Life had been so good – talks to himself, more internal questions – Why am in this place? Preaches a sermon to himself – put your hope in Him, I WILL still praise him.

I am deeply depressed; therefore I remember you from the land of Jordan and the peaks of Hermon, from Mount Mizar. Deep calls to deep in the roar of your waterfalls; all your breakers and your billows have swept over me.

Back to a low emotional position – deeply depressed.  More intentional remembering. Back to the clash–  breakers/billows sweeping over me & the Lord sending his faithful love

The Lord will send his faithful love by day; his song will be with me in the night— a prayer to the God of my life.

We can sing to UNBURDEN OUR SOUL

Music has this way of causing us to participate. What God is doing inside of us comes together with our senses. We feel, we hear, we speak, we make a choice with our will/volition/mind) to participate.

When I speak of unburdening our soul, we also sing out of a sense of victory. We see God at work. Listen to Psalm 18

3I called to the Lord, who is worthy of praise, and I was saved from my enemies. 4The ropes of death were wrapped around me; the torrents of destruction terrified me. 5The ropes of Sheol entangled me; the snares of death confronted me. 6I called to the Lord in my distress, and I cried to my God for help. From his temple he heard my voice, and my cry to him reached his ears.

32God—he clothes me with strength and makes my way perfect.

35You have given me the shield of your salvation; your right hand upholds me, and your humility exalts me. 36You make a spacious place beneath me for my steps, and my ankles do not give way.

49Therefore I will give thanks to you among the nations, Lord; I will sing praises about your name.

In a very real sense the Lord helped. So we sing,

Through many dangers, toils and snares Be still, my soul, bear patiently the cross of grief or pain Though Satan should buffet, those trials should come Be thou my breastplate, my sword for the fight. I will wait for you

We sing to unburden our soul

Singing is connected to something else in Scripture. Something else drives God’s people to sing in Psalms: salvation. God’s people sing because God has saved us.

When I talk about salvation, one dimension of that is God’s global, eternal plan to save people from all nations.  That’s Psalm 98.

1Sing a new song to the Lord, for he has performed wonders; his right hand and holy arm have won him victory. 3He has remembered his love and faithfulness to the house of Israel; all the ends of the earth have seen our God’s victory. 4Let the whole earth shout to the Lord; be jubilant, shout for joy, and sing. 7Let the sea and all that fills it, the world and those who live in it, resound.

Sing to  express joy  and trust in God saving you

There is this eternal, global, massive aspect to who God is. As much as we want to emphasize God being close/near and approachable/accessible (which is all true), there’s a reminder that He is higher than us, and so are his plans. He is unlimited, unbounded, and that pulls a song out of us.

and if there was nothing else God had ever done, that would be enough cause for us to sing.

But, God’s rescue plan isn’t generic in the Bible. It’s specific. He comes to rescue people in particular time/space. Several Psalms tell the story of God’s people coming out of Egypt, across the Red Sea, in the wilderness, crossing the Jordan, going into Canaan. That’s Psalm 105

1Give thanks to the Lord, call on his name; proclaim his deeds among the peoples. 2Sing to him, sing praise to him; tell about all his wondrous works!

5Remember the wondrous works he has done, his wonders, and the judgments he has pronounced, 6you offspring of Abraham his servant, Jacob’s descendants—his chosen ones.

8He remembers his covenant forever, the promise he ordained for a thousand generations— 9the covenant he made with Abraham, swore to Isaac, 10and confirmed to Jacob as a decree and to Israel as a permanent covenant:

As ones who trust in Jesus, we adapt the rescue story, don’t we. We read of Egypt, wilderness, and Canaan, but we also think of other particular places: Bethlehem, Galilee, Gethsemane, cross, tomb. And we remember the resurrection, ascension —> Which is why there are songs that take us verse by verse through the life of Jesus

In Christ Alone – Fullness of God in helpless babe, on the cross as Jesus died, in the ground his body lay, then bursting forth, as he stands in victory

King of Kings – In the darkness we were waiting, then the church of Christ was born

They hit the highlights of the good news/gospel story through Jesus.

It’s all so personal to us. We sing because WE are saved. We’re the ones who’ve experienced grace. We know what it’s like to be this side of the cross and resurrection. Listen to Psalm 71

15My mouth will tell about your righteousness and your salvation all day long, though I cannot sum them up. 23My lips will shout for joy when I sing praise to you because you have redeemed me.

We sing

I was a wretch, I remember who I was, I was lost, I was blind, I was running out of time, sin separated the breach was far too wide

What can wash away my sin, nothing but the blood of Jesus, what can make me whole again, nothing but the blood of Jesus. This is all my hope and peace. This is all my righteousness

How great the chasm that lay between us, how great the mountain I could not climb.

I hear the Savior say, your strength indeed is small. Find in me your all in all. Sin had left a crimson stain, He washed it white as snow.

One last thing we see in Psalm 40.

2He brought me up from a desolate pit, out of the muddy clay, and set my feet on a rock, making my steps secure. 3He put a new song in my mouth, a hymn of praise to our God. Many will see and fear, and they will trust in the Lord.

A new song. As in…

33:3 Sing a new song to him 96:1 Sing a new song to the Lord; let the whole earth sing to the Lord. 98:1 Sing a new song to the Lord… 144:9 God, I will sing a new song to you 149:1 Sing to the Lord a new song, his praise in the assembly of the faithful

Fresh reasons to express our hope to the Lord, fresh ways to put melodies and harmonies together to celebrate who the Lord is.

CONCLUSIONS

Just to review. We sing to

Process our lives before the Lord Say thanks to God Unburden our soul Express our joy and trust in God saving us.

This is one of those days where we immediately get to put something we just heard into practice. I am going to close our time in prayer, and then we’re going to close our service by singing Amazing Grace.

<><><><><>

6.7.2026  Brainerd Baptist Church