COMPLETE IN CHRISTTHE CENTER OF EVERYTHINGCOLOSSIANS 1:15-23

INTRO: Who are the most important people in your world? If you had to name 5, what would that list look like? Would Jesus make the top 5?

Is he really so central to everything: your identity, decision-making, purpose, future? Do you live for him, through him?

The book of Colossians drives home the reason that he should be so central: if you have Jesus, if Jesus has you, you are complete (series). You will need nothing else.

My prayer for us today is that what we encounter in God’s Word would drive Jesus to the center if He’s not there already. Paul sets us up to appreciate Jesus, by swerving into a different lane starting in 1:15. Sounds like a majestic hymn. In poetic language, we stare at Jesus.

Read Colossians 1:15-20

Paul lays an unmistakable foundation for who Jesus is and what he accomplished. I find it helpful to view this through a series of relationships

#1 – How Jesus relates to the invisible God, speaks of IDENTITY

15He is the image of the invisible God.

There is a really deep conversation in the Bible about humans being made in the image of God. This highlights something extraordinary

Jesus is exactly the very nature, and character of God. God has been perfectly revealed in Jesus. We can see what God is like in his very nature and being.

One of the words Christians use to describe this reality is the word “trinity.” 1 God —> but there’s a distinction here: the Son has every characteristic of being God AND there’s still the invisible God

A few other places in Scripture say something very similar…

John 1:18 – No one has ever seen God. The one and only Son, who is himself God and is at the Father’s side—he has revealed him.Hebrews 1:3 – The Son is the exact expression of his nature, sustaining all things by his powerful word.

Maybe you’re not yet fully convinced of all Christianity, but you do believe in something deeper. It seems like more and more people are less and less skeptical of the fact that some higher being made all this. But when you get there, you still have a question…what is “the being” like? Now we know

Also, God made a decisive choice…

19For God was pleased to have all his fullness dwell in him

That’s quite a statement – dwelling of God was in a place, tabernacle, Zion, the temple; that seems to make a lot of sense [smoke, fire]

Here a person comes on the scene – In his flesh, he is the “place” in whom God in all his fullness was pleased to take up residence.  All the attributes/activities of God – his spirit, word, wisdom, and glory – are perfectly displayed in Christ.

We don’t just have puzzle pieces or clues. We have God in his fullness.

Our response of worship: Through Jesus we get an amazing look into who God is. Jesus, thank you for showing us exactly who God is.

Baseball season has started, it’s almost like the first at-bat in this passage has been the longest home run we’ve ever seen.

#2 – How Jesus relates to every created thing – His rank and centrality

15bthe firstborn over all creation

This doesn’t mean that he’s the first thing created. It’s talking about rank. The Bible does this in other places.

Psalm 89 – 20I have found David my servant; I have anointed him with my sacred oil. 26He will call to me, ‘You are my Father, my God, the rock of my salvation.’ 27I will also make him my firstborn, greatest of the kings of the earth. 28I will always preserve my faithful love for him, and my covenant with him will endure.

Notice that firstborn communicates rank. And when you come back to Colossians, you can be assured Jesus ranks at the top (firstborn over all creation). And if there was still any confusion. (back to created slide)

16For everything was created by him, in heaven and on earth, the visible and the invisible, whether thrones or dominions or rulers or authorities

Jesus creates every single thing (all the all’s and all the everything’s). Everything you see, everything you don’t, even spiritual beings that you can’t see, Nothing was created apart from his command

16ball things have been created through him and for him.

Everything centers on Jesus – which is why he should be at the center of your life. And he is the goal of it all, all this is for him. This world is a stage for Jesus to display his love, his power, his wisdom, his faithfulness, his holiness

17He is before all things

This is the time element – before all these created things. He is preexistent. Before Bethlehem, the Son was!

Paul is writing this in a timeframe where people could’ve potentially had an encounter with the man Jesus (before his ascension). It would be hard to envision a human being in this category. Jesus is 1 of 1

17bby him all things hold together.

Jesus is the connector - all things hold together continually (perfect tense). “Apart from his continuous sustaining activity, all would disintegrate” (O’Brien). What holds all things together aren’t

A philosophy on how life should be done, but a person. OR random, processes of science, standing behind all of those, is Jesus

Lots of things seem big, important, powerful, but they all are under Jesus. How foolish would it be to live my life with Jesus only playing a minor role, a supporting actor, an occasional speaking part.

Jesus ranks above all created things.

How Jesus relates to God’s people (the church) – Intimate connection

18He is also the head of the body, the church;

The body = description used here and in Ephesians. It refers to the church, an assembly of people God has gathered together in the name of Jesus, God’s people (rescued, made alive, chosen, dearly loved, set apart)

Jesus at the head —> the control center, giving the body (which is joined to him) our direction and marching orders

he is the beginning,

The headwaters, the founder of a new humanity, a new people

in the beginning, Adam was created. Something new has happened – Jesus, a new Adam, last Adam (2 Corinthians 5 – new creation)

How did all that happen?

the firstborn from the dead (more will come)

Jesus was victorious over death. The new creation reality happens. The resurrection age has started; our current age (with the brokenness) has a time-stamp on it and will end someday. We won’t be going back; old things pass away

so that he might come to have first place in everything.

He is supreme, preeminent, nothing above

You take inventory, and you realize just how special God’s people are to him; intimate connection. Nothing else in creation is spoken of like that.

Sometimes are feelings don’t help us here.  But what anchors us is the truth of who Jesus is.

How Jesus relates to all that is alienated - reconciliation mission

19For God was pleased to have all his fullness dwell in him, 20and through him to reconcile everything to himself, whether things on earth or things in heaven,

We’re in the deep end of the pool. Everything was originally created in, through, for Jesus. He is the Lord. But clearly something has happened. The unity is ruptured. The world lacks harmony, wholeness; the world is disintegrating, a world in rebellion.

God chooses for His Son to come to earth. When reconciliation comes up (Rom 5, 11, 2 Cor 5), God takes the initiative toward people, and the basis is his love and grace

There had been hostility, he deals with it. Here, it’s not just created human beings but the wider creation is also changed

Something is done will all the effects of the curse – the life of Jesus

People who would be far away being brought nearPeople who would have physical challenges being healedCreation – sea, bread, water being channeled by their creator

An experience, a taste of something better. Jesus comes and does those things, and yet enemies stand against him. You could be forgiven if you think Jesus could and should just annihilate every one of the people who had stood against him, or even failed him (ran, denied).

Jesus chose a different path. Actually, the death of Jesus accomplishes the reconciliation plan. He dies and opens heaven.

(He reconciled us) by making peace through HIS blood, shed on the cross.

In Christ bleeding and dying, the universe has been reconciled. Heaven and earth have been brought back into order. The universe lines up again under its creator, and peace returns. Something starts at the cross.

His death which was so bloody and violent, brought peace

could there be a death that would end death once and for alla death that actually was so powerful, it changed things (everything)could there be a death that accomplished a victory

This was the worst, and it didn’t defeat him. This was the worst, and something was greater – his love

Good Friday – there is this reckoning (birth, resurrection)

This is no time to play games. No time to speculate and move on.

What must I do to be saved –if you’ve not yet believed?What should I do in view of God’s mercies – offer my life as a living sacrifice

We have swerved into a very different lane. There are very few like it in the whole NT. But, Paul drives things home. This is Jesus Back to the Colossians and back to us in Chattanooga.

21Once you were alienated and hostile in your minds as expressed in your evil actions. 22But now he has reconciled you by his physical body through his death, to present you holy, faultless, and blameless before him—

How does the Son relate to you personally (21)

Paul is speaking to a set of people who are “in Jesus.” Not a one-time decision they made a decade ago that doesn’t mean a whole lot to them, but he’s talking about a status and condition that affects the day-by-day reality they’re living.

Maybe that’s you and you will easily identifyMaybe that’s not you (yet), but you will be eager to identify

Follow the progression. There is ONCE. Alienation/estrangement; hostility

in your minds – mindset, disposition; someone comes and you’re on edge, you really want to see them lose

expressed through your evil actions

But, there is also a “NOW” in v.22. Your current status is one of being reconciled. Any gap that previously existed is closed.

This is more than just “we had a disagreement and we moved past it.” Or “I just decided to be the bigger person.” No, the issue is dealt with because Jesus personally dealt with it. A relationship is restored.

This happened by his physical body through his death. The sacrificial offering to God, pleasing offering, enough, paid in full, sins don’t have to be litigated or accounted for. What he’s done is enough.

ONE DAY in the future. This transformation that God began through reconciling you culminates in a presentation. In the presence of God, you are recognized as

Holy – set apart for the Lord’s purposes. That’s you.

Faultless = without blemish; picture of an OT sacrificial animal that is offered up to the Lord. Nothing disqualifying; that’s you, you’re the kind of offering the Lord find’s great pleasure, your life honors him.

Blameless = courtroom; any sort of legal issues are dealt with. You are in the clear, no reproach sticks to you, no condemnation, exoneration —> model of what new life looks like

This is where all of this is headed and it’s staggering. That is one day in your future. But, between now and then, verse 23 spells things out well:

23if indeed you remain grounded and steadfast in the faith and are not shifted away from the hope of the gospel that you heard.

Please don’t get tripped up by the IF. I know that can be a temptation.

Listen carefully…In light of where you once were, In light of what your status is now, In light of how you will be presented one day, What way of living today and tomorrow and the next decades, what choices make the most sense?  (Dotted Arrow)

You are grounded – stay thereYou are steadfast – remain thereDon’t let yourself be shifted away from hope

Jesus has told you he holds everything together. God has taken the initiative of making peace. The cross is conclusive.

So, when you shift a little into panic mode and wonder…what if I do something stupid. How can I have solid confidence and assurance?

The answer will always be “look to Jesus”

The message will never be “just coast”, but it really is remain, fight (but don’t be afraid because Jesus gives you the strength, and he’s already been in this fight and accomplished your victory)

This is the foundation of your faith, and there are no cracks in that foundation, so stay steady and grounded.

You will never hear “you better keep putting points on the board to earn grace.” No, it’s because God has given grace, hold on to that, don’t shift from hoping in that, and your life will produce fruit.

And the message won’t ever be “try your best to hang on to your relationship with God.” That would be way out of order. It’s this: you are his permanent bride, so do whatever you can to make this relationship one of openness, love, priority (because you value the marriage, you work at it)

This is your hope. Don’t shift away from it.  There’s no hope in anything else.

CONCLUSION: Today is Palm Sunday. Christians for hundreds of years, all over the world, have marked out this day, this week to recognize the identity of Jesus. We’ve humbled ourselves before Him, and we’ve experienced relief because he has reconciled us. Hosanna, save us, Lord.

Today is the day through faith, through repentance, we’re not just a curious onlooker in the crowd. We receive him as Lord, call out to him as Savior, and we are joined to Him forever.

3.29.2026    Brainerd Baptist Church