AT HIS FEET, LISTENING TO HIS WORDLuke 10:38-42

What are some of your favorite stories about Jesus in the Bible? That’s a hard question. Jesus walking on the water, hearing approval from his father from heaven, casting out demons, feeding multitudes, raising the dead, and ALL of these stories are TRUE and they’re important.

But even the stories that don’t have the fireworks are so important as well. Jesus did 1000 things that weren’t recorded in Scripture, so the fact that this story was recorded and passed along tells me something about the will of God for me to understand Jesus a little better.

Luke 10:38-42   38While they were traveling, Jesus entered a village, and a woman named Martha welcomed him into her home. 39She had a sister named Mary, who also sat at the Lord’s feet and was listening to what he said. 40But Martha was distracted by her many tasks, and she came up and asked, “Lord, don’t you care that my sister has left me to serve alone? So tell her to give me a hand.” 41The Lord answered her, “Martha, Martha, you are worried and upset about many things, 42but one thing is necessary. Mary has made the right choice, and it will not be taken away from her.”

The Lord has things to teach all of us, but let’s be careful not to “Martha-bash.” We can be as respectful and kind to her as Jesus was. After all, she welcomed our Lord into her house, and wanted to treat him right.

We’re going to ask a few questions to help us process this story. First, what does Martha want? And second, what does Jesus want? First…

WHAT DOES MARTHA REALLY WANT?

Martha’s radar is dialed in – she's sharp, she keeps score. She notices…

who's doing what,  who's not doing somethingwhat needs to be done, what needs to be said, who needs to say it

Can you relate to Martha here? It’s not a foreign world for me to inhabit.

What does she want? Well, Martha has an agenda for Mary – She sees Mary (39) not really doing much, she’s listening to Jesus, but Martha sees what needs to be done, and comes to the conclusion that “Mary just needs to help!”

Has Martha hinted, sighed, said to herself “this is what she always does.” Does the tension build as minutes pass? Does she drops a subtle clue or 2 or 10?

Something’s missed, something’s burning, something goes wrong. “I am left alone to serve (again), she should be helping.”

Martha also has an agenda for Jesus. Martha sees how Jesus can help her cause. Surely, Jesus sees the disparity and the issues. Surely, he notices the dynamic. But, he doesn’t say anything about it. And with every pressing minute, she knows what needs to be done. Jesus needs to say something (VERSES). The wording here implies she’s bold, marching up to Jesus.

Don’t you care? You have to care. You do, right?You have to speak up for me. Just encourage her to pitch in, is that too much to ask?

Such a human moment, and a tense one. Setting aside the reality that Martha is telling Jesus what to do, and trying to be fair, she may have a point, so what should Jesus do?

Jesus could just politely say, “Mary, we need your help here.”

We could imagine a scenario where Jesus splits the middle. “We all can do our part, let’s be nice.”

Jesus does neither, AND he does care deeply about Martha.

What seems to be really going on with Martha – clearly things aren't going her way [very few of us feel good when that happens]. Deeper, she had an expectation of what this would look like. It isn’t happening. She may feel guilt, irritation, regret, disappointment. [EXPECTATIONS MET]

It’s not lost on me, that the things that Martha is trying to accomplish aren’t necessarily bad things, they’re good things, even important things. But, it crossed a line somewhere.

Sometimes even reasonable expectations degenerate into some pretty unreasonable responses [reasonable to expect a referee to officiate a game correctly, exploding when it doesn’t happen].

These kinds of reactions affect the nature of relationships – family and friends. She’s leaning in, speaking up, and highly frustrated. In situations like these there can be verbal shrapnel flying.

Affects her internally (distracted – 40, worried/upset – 41). Let’s be honest, no one wants to live there. Sometimes, I can feel it coming on, can you? It’s a shame people have to live with me.

At the end, here’s the big issue that Jesus is pressing in to show her – she's pulled away from Jesus. What she wants in that moment has actually pulled her away from something that could be happening for her.

Martha could be at his feet, listening to his words, and instead, she’s not. No amount of domineering, manipulating, or irritation is going to help. Her real problem isn’t going to be fixed that way.

APPLY – I see this as an open invitation for us to read into our own lives.

Am I in some way being pulled away right now?  You’re at the ocean, and the tide is pulling you further down the shore.

As you look at your life, what do you see? Big/small, good/pathetic, long-term/immediate, obvious/hidden, new/familiar

What’s going on? What gets in the way, what pulls us away (it kind of depends)? Can we be honest? Sometimes, it’s really our wiring.

Type A-ness – doesn’t feel like anything getting’s done, so we work ourselves to the bone, often under-appreciated. Spiritually, things aren’t in a good place. You’re upset, and it’s not getting resolved.

But, it’s possible other things are pulling you away. When I read that she’s distracted, I think, Martha, we’re there, too. The news, sports, diagnosis, call, family, work. I know I’ve got to think about it. But, slowly, it pulls me away, and I don’t detect it.

Martha had her own obstacles. We have ours. What’s pulling us away?

We all have Martha moments, and it’s not so comfortable when Jesus calls us on it. This is what He does. Jesus comes after the 1 lost sheep. He loves that much. The Father goes out to the stubborn older brother or sister. Jesus comes after us. That’s the picture. Jesus addresses Martha.

Martha’s stuck, but Jesus isn’t.You’re distracted, Jesus is laser-focused on your heart.Martha’s worried, Jesus is ready to settle her.You’re upset, and He’s prepared to restore your soul.

This is the one who created the world, upholds it with His word, has been entrusted with all authority, AND is sympathetic to our weakness.

Maybe we should ask the next question. Because it really isn’t about what Martha wants.

WHAT DOES JESUS WANT?

There is something so much better. Jesus doesn’t launch into a multi-step distraction-detox program. He calls her name.

41The Lord answered her, “Martha, Martha, you are worried and upset about many things, 42but one thing is necessary. Mary has made the right choice, and it will not be taken away from her.”

He engages Martha very personally. “Martha, Martha.” I feel like I have done this with my kids.

If name #1 – means pay attention…then name #2 – means I really want you to know how much I care. This isn’t a scolding moment, even though I have the sense you might take it that way.

Then Jesus says, “YOU ARE…” Here is where you are! He describes the reality of her heart [worried/upset]. At one level, that’s not very easy to hear. On another level, it was relieving in some ways. He knows her inside and out.

Jesus is speaking, not really saying “Shame on you,” but “look at what's going on. I am here, but you’re a million miles away (or maybe a few feet away).” You could be at my feet, listening to my word, instead you’re in my face, telling me what to do.”

There isn’t a cold scold from Jesus. But, if Jesus is present, speaking your name, speaking words of life to you…What could it look like if you were in a place where you’re ready to hear, you’re willing to listen.

Jesus draws the lines really sharply. Not gray areas.

Something is URGENT/necessary – even if you don’t see it as that important, even if other things are vying for attention in this moment.

Something is BETTER. “right choice” or translations say “good portion.” Meal terminology. When you can have the nourishment of God’s Word, that is the meal to pay attention to. Mary got the good portion, made the right choice.  There’s nothing better right now.

Something is LASTING. This time invested in being at Jesus’ feet, listening to His word can’t be taken away. Not in that moment. And projecting it out, not over a series of moments, over days, weeks, years. This will last. This will endure

Martha’s primary issue isn’t that she’s just so overloaded and hasn’t practiced enough self-care. It’s that Jesus is talking, and she hasn’t fully grasped what happens when he speaks. What if she missed how he…

comforts– you don’t have to be afraid, peace be still, your Father knows the # of hairs on your head, where I am you will be

clarifies – my kingdom isn’t of this world, no one who has given up anything for me will be on the losing end of things

challenges – in this world you will have persecution; you can’t serve two masters; leave it all, follow me; your heart is far from me

convicts – watch and pray, you’re not really ready to be my disciple, you’re trying to be great instead of serving.

What if Martha missed some/all of that?

But are we tuned in. Oh yeah, but you have that busy day, lots of stuff, the appointment, get the high score on the mind-numbing game you’re playing. Then you get stressed, and you try to ChatGPT your way through it. Are you sensing the issue?

If you do, Jesus’ goal, my goal isn’t for us to feel like losers (even if we are complete idiots sometimes). My goal is for you to be blown away: Jesus is eager to spend time with you!  Your proximity matters to him, For all of what you think religion is, or spirituality is.

Not all out blitz to follow all the rules, earn favor (or at least avoid wrath).  Not just an endless quest to find yourself.

Listening to the words of God at the feet of Jesus will put you in the best position to appreciate and come to know God and his love more fully.

You begin to process that Jesus came to earth to save rebelsCame to rescue those who would believe in HimCame to give new life to those who would turn from everything else.

That is what he wants. You at His feet, listening to His word.

Tension to manage and the Martha’s among us have spotted it. Stuff still has to get done, someone has to bulldog it. Life isn’t about all-day, 7-day a week Bible reading – at some point.

I am not sure how to manage it all. But two things seem pretty important.

DEVOTED TIME

Could we get to a point where a few more minutes each day are devoted to Him, listening, speaking to Him, enjoying. Maybe over time our distractions become fewer.

Could we get to the place where we hear his voice speaking in other groups of believers. We’re in a Bible study, a lifegroup, and for whatever reason, we hear someone else speaking God’s Word and it lands in a fresh way.

Could we get to the place where Sundays you consistently found joy in singing, listening to him, humbled by who he is, praying to Him. Taking in the privilege of being together.

What needs to change here?

REDIRECTING TRIGGERS

Let’s be realistic. It's not likely that Marthas will do immediate 180’s. Martha will always be Martha. And the world will always bring some complications. She’ll see what needs to be done, and something will fire.

What if she grew, and the raw expression of her feelings were not so quick to be judgmental or in-your-face, able to see the good, even if that wasn’t her first impulse.

What if she was not so quick to try to maneuver others to get her way. What if she didn’t go there so quickly?

What if on occasion she found a way to deescalate her own stress, change expectations, and see what good might be happening?

What if that allowed her to take 10-20% more time reflecting on what Jesus said? What if she took that in? What if she was a tad less distracted, and priorities shifted? More content, even though she would have to fight for it? Not on the verge of being upset. Relying more on God’s good plan. I am not talking about passive resignation, but contentment and faith.

What if the interaction with Jesus changed Martha? Changed for the better, because of Jesus shining a spotlight on the urgent, good, enduring way we can spend our lives. That would be so good

I believe that can happen to you. Jesus will give us exactly what we need.

CLOSING PRAYER