BEHIND THE SCENES THE KING EXPOSED ESTHER 1

INTRO:  Imagine you’re at a retirement party. How odd would it be to look around and notice that the person who is retiring isn’t actually there. Or you have gone to a bridal shower, and the bride-to-be never makes an appearance. Something doesn’t feel right about that.

Odder than that is when God isn’t mentioned in a book of the Bible. That’s the case in the book of Esther. No mention of God, the temple, no explicit mention of prayer, worship, no law/Torah. That’s the book of Esther. At times, it seems like God is nowhere. But, as you read the book, you see him at work behind the scenes. He IS very much present, and I want you to see that in the next several weeks.

We could spend a while on background details. It’s probably better to just cannonball into the world of Esther, which is ancient Persia. We can walk verse by verse through chapter 1, and I’ll try to highlight some background information. Then, I think it would be best to zoom out, and I have some guideposts that we could use for studying this book.

1These events took place during the days of Ahasuerus, who ruled 127 provinces from India to Cush. 2In those days King Ahasuerus reigned from his royal throne in the fortress at Susa. 3He held a feast in the third year of his reign for all his officials and staff, the army of Persia and Media, the nobles, and the officials from the provinces. 4He displayed the glorious wealth of his kingdom and the magnificent splendor of his greatness for a total of 180 days.

Some of you know how much I love history/geography. I will be merciful and spare you every single detail, but questions like where, who, when are all important here.

WHERE does this take place?  (MAP) – this is on the eastern edge of what the OT covers WHO is Ahasuerus? King Xerxes who is 35 at the time. Many historians believe this is in part a war council to invade Greece WHEN does this happen? (TIMELINE)

Esther takes place after some people are already back in Jerusalem. Also, it comes as Old Testament history closes.

The king looks large & in charge (all the references to king/royal), showing off enormous wealth and power and providing generously for his subjects for 180 days. In response, he would expect gratitude, respect and complete loyalty. But, there’s more going on here.

1:5–8 5At the end of this time, the king held a week-long banquet in the garden courtyard of the royal palace for all the people, from the greatest to the least, who were present in the fortress of Susa. 6White and blue linen hangings were fastened with fine white and purple linen cords to silver rods on marble columns. Gold and silver couches were arranged on a mosaic pavement of red feldspar, marble, mother-of-pearl, and precious stones. 7Drinks were served in an array of gold goblets, each with a different design. Royal wine flowed freely, according to the king’s bounty. 8The drinking was according to royal decree: “There are no restrictions.” The king had ordered every wine steward in his household to serve whatever each person wanted.

We’re still in Susa. We’ve moved from the city to the fortress/citadel. There’s a week-long feast [it all begins to feel like Mardi Gras or Carnivale]

A noted element of feast is alcohol. Why does it seem like alcohol is connected to these displays of power?

This scene is meant to convey excess. Over the top. Just as you begin to be impressed by this display, you are also a little disturbed. Is all this really needed? Do good things come out of ‘celebrations’ like this, everyone’s staggering back to their hotel?

1:9–12 9Queen Vashti also gave a feast for the women of King Ahasuerus’s palace. 10On the seventh day, when the king was feeling good from the wine, Ahasuerus commanded Mehuman, Biztha, Harbona, Bigtha, Abagtha, Zethar, and Carkas—the seven eunuchs who personally served him— 11to bring Queen Vashti before him with her royal crown. He wanted to show off her beauty to the people and the officials, because she was very beautiful. 12But Queen Vashti refused to come at the king’s command that was delivered by his eunuchs. The king became furious and his anger burned within him.

What was Ahasuerus thinking? We have no idea. Why does it take 7 men to bring the queen? Is this a flex? And why is it that regularly in these types of events, women are taken advantage of? It almost seems inevitable.

You go down the road of arrogance, exploitation. Some expression of poor judgment often comes at the expense of someone else’s security and status. This story is not an exception.

But Vashti doesn’t come. The picture perfect party comes to a screeching halt. Everyone does what the king says, except for one person.

With the words we read, we feel emotion. Things escalate so quickly. A king who can do what he wants, who wants to appear in charge, wants to be generous (or at least appear generous), and his wife, the queen just won’t cooperate. We now have a situation.

13–15 13The king consulted the wise men who understood the times, for it was his normal procedure to confer with experts in law and justice. 14The most trusted ones were Carshena, Shethar, Admatha, Tarshish, Meres, Marsena, and Memucan. They were the seven officials of Persia and Media who had personal access to the king and occupied the highest positions in the kingdom. 15The king asked, “According to the law, what should be done with Queen Vashti, since she refused to obey King Ahasuerus’s command that was delivered by the eunuchs?”

We’re introduced to a special group of (let’s call them) “the wise guys.” They have unique access. They understand the times. Maybe they are comparable to the cabinet. They immediately are gathered. Let’s follow the law. What should we do? What will the wise answer be?

16–18 16Memucan said in the presence of the king and his officials, “Queen Vashti has wronged not only the king, but all the officials and the peoples who are in every one of King Ahasuerus’s provinces. 17For the queen’s action will become public knowledge to all the women and cause them to despise their husbands and say, ‘King Ahasuerus ordered Queen Vashti brought before him, but she did not come.’ 18Before this day is over, the noble women of Persia and Media who hear about the queen’s act will say the same thing to all the king’s officials, resulting in more contempt and fury.

We need wisdom from the wise guys. Instead we get “Vashti’s actually committed a crime against humanity. Everyone everywhere!” This will lead to women not really respecting their husbands. “more contempt and fury”

The whole world’s gonna be messed up when they find out” It’s only right to step up and do something about all this.

How will the king regain respect? We’ve got to get out in front of this. We have a royal PR firm that is looking at how to do damage control. Have no fear. The best and the brightest are working on it.

19–20 19“If it meets the king’s approval, he should personally issue a royal decree. Let it be recorded in the laws of the Persians and the Medes, so that it cannot be revoked: Vashti is not to enter King Ahasuerus’s presence, and her royal position is to be given to another woman who is more worthy than she. 20The decree the king issues will be heard throughout his vast kingdom, so all women will honor their husbands, from the greatest to the least.”

“Totally your decision, but if you’re asking me…” Vashti is done. You can do so much better. Let’s show how powerful you are. Let’s make a public spectacle of her, let’s pass some laws and then we can get on with the menfolk getting some honor in the homes around here.

It must’ve sounded like such a great idea because the king’s totally on board with the wise guys.

21–22 21The king and his counselors approved the proposal, and he followed Memucan’s advice. 22He sent letters to all the royal provinces, to each province in its own script and to each ethnic group in its own language, that every man should be master of his own house and speak in the language of his own people.

Even the way this is written, is meant for us to see through the nonsense.

Maybe you’ve been at an organization where something like this has come down from on high. Someone at the top got into it with someone else, and now we have a companywide memo.  It’s a joke if you have to go to those lengths to try to let people know you’re the boss. It’s a sham. Magnify that to world-empire scale.

The king who started off strong, now looks weak. He is quickly angered. Then gets some self-serving advice from people who play to his pride. This is who is driving the empire. It’s hard not to scratch your head. Authority makes stupidity more public and more dangerous.

This is a world where power is in Ahasuerus’ incompetent hands. {SERIES}

That is the story, but we need to pull up and evaluate what we have. What do WE do with all of this?

We trust Scripture is God-breathed. We believe it’s profitable (2 Tim 3). It’s written so we would have encouragement/hope (Rom 15), and we are to “humbly receive the word which is able to save your souls.” (James 1:21). So, how do we “humbly receive THIS word”?

The world of Esther presents as such a different world in so many ways, which at first makes it tough to sort through what we do with it!

World where God is written out, lots of people seem to make sense of their lives without him.

A place where people in charge are dangerously wishy-washy and often foolish.

A place where women are put in the position of having to say “enough is enough” to foolish men. A place where the most vulnerable are often exploited, not cared for.

A place where advisors cover their own tails, rather than speaking what needs to be said. This is a world that is tough.

This is a place where undoubtedly God’s people feel pressure, they regularly have to make complicated decisions. What does trust in God look like? What does living out your faith mean in Susa?

Susa actually may not be so different from the world we live in!

When it comes to government, entertainment, business, do we have a lot of confidence that wisdom regularly prevails?

On smaller levels (supervisors, professors, family members) do you feel like you’re going down a slalom course just to survive.

Do you ever find the vulnerable exploited

We live in places where it can become tough to be a follower of Jesus.

Esther can be really helpful for us. This first chapter sets the scene and introduces us to one of the characters. But, I’ve sensed it would be helpful to have a few guideposts to help us sort through this book of the Bible.

When it comes to Esther, you have to READ FOR MORE THAN MORALS

There are plenty of moral absolutes in the Bible. Thou shalt not commit adultery. Love your neighbor as yourself. There are morals, even in what we read in chapter 1 of the book of Esther.

Often, very foolish decisions are adjacent to alcohol

Exploitation of women should have no place in any culture, and should be stood against by the people of God.

But what I mean, is that there’s often no clear cut “moral of the story.” There are things to learn about the ways of people, even the ways of God, but when we want good guys/bad guys simplicity, I think that will limit what we see. A lot of actions by even the “good guys” are somewhere between the “commendable and the questionable.”

The more you read the Bible, the more you realize that it’s not like the little above ground pool where you can see clearly to the bottom. It’s like the deep ocean floor where we might truly know a fraction of what’s going on.

Resist the urge to make this mainly a character study. [Don’t be like him. Be like him. Be like her. Don’t be like her.] Esther isn’t written as a simplistic nursery rhyme or a Berenstain Bears book. There is some complexity, which is helpful. Your world is complex.

Be patient. Try to discern a bigger picture. Another guidepost in Esther is that you really can SEE THE UNSEEN GOD

The events of Esther may seem completely secular, seem to give God no thought at all. Yet, God’s moving. His will is going to be done.

This book is all about the providence of God. This will unfold as we walk through it over the next several weeks.

Providence (Jobes) = in some invisible and inscrutable way, God governs all creatures, actions, and circumstances through the normal and the ordinary course of human life, without the intervention of the miraculous.

This isn’t academic. We need to internalize this, because there are times where God seems very remote and distant. We cannot see him working, he doesn’t seem to be answering prayers and giving us what we ask, but that doesn’t mean he’s doing nothing. {in Esther, we don’t read of the Red Sea parting, miraculous manna showing up, the sun doesn’t stand still, no giant fish swallows and spits up}. But, God is just as much at work, behind the things that are seen. Lord, help us to learn that.

Truly, Esther will be a guidepost to BOW BEFORE THE ONLY TRUE KING

We will see a portrait of King Ahasuerus

Power – authority to make people do his bidding (almost always) Nations – international authority (for a season) Feasts/Celebrations – that have some ulterior designs

Those tell us about who he is, how he exercises authority. At the end of the day he comes across as a joke, which feels really dangerous for a king.

Yet, apart from the joke, who is worthy of our worship? Is there some power or control we feel like we have to have? Can anyone or anything give us exactly what we want every single time?

Psalm 2  I have installed my king on Zion, my holy mountain. So now, kings, be wise; receive instruction, you judges of the earth. Serve the Lord with reverential awe and rejoice with trembling.

Serious words. Esther invites us to look at Ahasuerus, to see the total disparity of his character especially as he is compared to another king in the Bible: King Jesus. We bow before the one true king

in Matthew, all authority in heaven and on earth is given to Him.

In Revelation Jesus is presented as the King of Kings, a collection of nations gathered to him in worship. He rules over them. There is a sea of people from every tribe and tongue. King Jesus brings the believers of these nations into a family, community of true worship

When it comes to the church, his people, Jesus is intent on making us exactly into who we are meant to be.

This king doesn’t exploit, He serves. Greater love has no one than this. He lays down his life on the cross. He brings us to God. He gives himself for you. In his world, foolishness doesn’t reign.

That is who should be king. YOUR king. Your ONLY king.

And although Esther never mentions his name, we have a powerful opportunity again and again to be drawn to Jesus.

PRAYER

<><><><><>

7.26.2026    Brainerd Baptist Church