COMPLETE IN CHRISTSERIOUS CONVERSATIONSCOLOSSIANS 2:4-15

INTRO: Every single one of us can tell when conversations get serious. We’re in the middle of talking with someone, small talk, back-and-forth, comments. Then it turns. Body language, tone of voice, call for attention. “I need you to listen carefully.” The signal is sent, the message is received. We “dial in” in a way we weren’t previously.

In our study of Colossians (series slide) we take one of those turns today in chapter 2.  Paul was prepared to have a serious conversation. Serious warnings (Be careful), preventative measures, places where we need to have our eyes wide open.

I think it would be most helpful to think through what really burdens Paul, who he had in mind for his serious conversation.

TARGET – A person who seems to be in Jesus. Not stupid, not necessarily gullible, but driven by curiosity and lots of questions. Never think they’ve found solid answers. And what they find isn’t leading them toward Jesus but away from him in some questionable places. At first it’s subtle. Slowly, they get further and further off. Over time they base more and more of their lives on things that sound reasonable, but actually are just big delusions. It goes deeper and deeper. It becomes who they are.

They’re convinced they’re “educating” themselves, doing research, watching a million videos, read articles, but you know how that works.

More deceived. In this world, spiritually speaking, that’s a live option. There will be things that sound really plausible and suck people in.

That’s tragic! If it was someone we really cared about, we would try to get ahead of it. We would want to help them guard against it. Paul wants to help the Colossians (and us) in case they’re being tempted, and so he speaks up.

4I am saying this so that no one will deceive you with arguments that sound reasonable. 5For I may be absent in body, but I am with you in spirit, rejoicing to see how well ordered you are and the strength of your faith in Christ. 6So then, just as you have received Christ Jesus as Lord, continue to walk in him, 7being rooted and built up in him and established in the faith, just as you were taught, and overflowing with gratitude.

You will avoid being deceived by CONTINUING TO WALK WITH JESUS

It sounds simple – Look at your progress in the faith, and continue walking with Jesus.

Paul says, “Here’s what I am seeing”  I am not there (but I have heard).

Your lives are lined up well. Your faith is strong because the object of your faith is trustworthy (Christ). What a gift, you’re placing your eternal existence in the hands of someone you cannot see, touch, hear audibly

I am hearing so many good things, I am seeing so many good things develop. “Here’s how you need to continue” (verses 6-7)

“Just as” (6) you received – confess and believe, repent and trust, that was a “front door” to a new life

But, what if repentance and faith aren’t just something you did once, but something you do as a part of your relationship with Jesus.

We receive Jesus Christ in a very dependent way. We take him at his word. We count on him that he’s telling us the truth about ourselves, who we’re meant to be, how we’ve messed up, how everything could be made right. So, we are so dependent. That’s how we receive Jesus.

Not just the front door, but It’s also like every room. In other words, we’re going to live this way: regularly turning from everything else, consistently relying on Jesus, we walk by faith, we trust him.

You received Jesus by grace through faith, Now walk with Jesus by grace through faith

Here’s the confidence you can have (7) – Here’s what’s been done, being done and how you can respond

As you walk with Jesus, you’re being rooted in him – I love the picture of a root system: living, depth/strength, put roots down, your whole root system is in Christ. You’re linked to Him. Gets deeper and stronger.

As you walk with Jesus, you’re being built up in Him – Every day that goes by Jesus is building something, brick by brick (he’s the mortar).

As you walk with Jesus, you’re being established in the faith – as time goes by Jesus stabilizes you. Your house/life is built on something where there’s a settling, strength over time.

Really hard stuff comes. You’ve watched something really sturdy, and said “that isn’t moving,” that’s like your faith in Jesus.

Stabilized in “the faith” “as you were taught” (moves it out of just a subjective experience, an impression you have, any sort of “I like to think of Jesus as a ______”). Truths that come from God that are wrapped up in Jesus, someone teaches those, we receive those, we hang on to those.

All the words of our walk are passive, we’re being rooted, built, up, established. That work is done on us, but we respond.  We respond to this by overflowing with gratitude – a real mark of a Christian.

One of the ways Sunday mornings can serve us all is to propel us into the week with grace-filled, grateful hearts.

It seems so simplistic, but what if the way we avoided deceiving ourselves, avoided delusions, was just to keep walking. Just keep putting 1 foot in front of the other in faith. What if God worked through that in all of us?

What could be more attractive, more reasonable, more plausible than taking note of the good work Jesus has done and is doing in our lives. Why would you not want to continue on that path?

That isn’t just for us individually. I want my heart protected. I believe this promises that as a church, we can be a church that isn’t easily deceived by lies. We don’t have to get caught up in what’s trendy.

Do you see that this is a serious conversation?

Paul also cares about what could enslave us, tighten its grip on us. He knows and we know that humans have become really good at building philosophy (a way of looking at the world) and traditions (passing things down).

In some ways, it’s rather harmless.  The “guys at work.”

But some things begin to have a destructive pull on us. We change: our behavior, relationships, something matters more to us than other things.

I’ve watched where there are values, systems, philosophies, really smart people, ideologies, compelling influential voices promise a lot. They say, “this matters” this is who you want to be, this is the image.

Money, power, comfort, control, relief, but for whatever reason we begin to sell out. Jesus means less and less, even as we convince ourselves our faith is really important.

You do know we all serve something. Even the most independent person. There’s an ongoing struggle for who you will serve spiritually, who really is your master, who will you submit to, what do you give your allegiance to. I want you to be free, but I also know the threat is real.

There are ways of doing life that get passed down (people say…here’s what you need to do), but are enslaving (you lose your freedom to make life-giving decisions)

Scripture says:

8Be careful that no one takes you captive through philosophy and empty deceit based on human tradition, based on the elements of the world, rather than Christ.

This could be an aha moment for us. There’s so much noise, and it often sounds so confident, sounds helpful, wise, like it makes sense, but it just completely takes God/Christ out of the equation. Spiritual bondage comes out of that, because as that plays out someone who isn’t omniscient ends up at the center, control panel, of our lives.

If he’s not really the creator (we are). He’s not really running the universe (we are). He doesn’t really ultimately save us (we save ourselves). He doesn’t deal with the ugly parts of us (we must). He isn’t really the best hope (we are).

For a millisecond it could sound good to be that in charge. It feels like that gives us the freedom to be our authentic true selves. To say to the world, “this is exactly who I am.”

But, you will only be your true self IN JESUS. Otherwise, you’re going to end up a slave to your feelings, urges, desires, lusts, impatience.

None of us want to live as a slave to anything or anyone. We don’t want to live having to do someone else’s agenda, especially if it harms us, or takes advantage of us. No one wants to live like that.

What can help? I want us to be the kinds of people that realize there’s an ongoing, lifelong struggle for who you will serve, who will be your master, who will you submit to, give your allegiance to, and in that struggle

You will only AVOID BEING TAKEN CAPTIVE BY SERVING THE ONLY ONE WORTH SERVING

It probably seems overly simplified. Scripture isn’t going to point you here to a million strategies to avoid being enslaved. There’s not going to be a lot of talk of having all the right boundaries, charting the right course. It’s a heart issue!

Paul’s will paint such a picture of who Jesus is, what he does, what he does for us, the results and status that flow from what he’s done.

That will move you to make sure he’s directing more and more. The more he’s your master, the more freedom you have, the less likely something else sucks you in. The strategy to fight being taken captive is Jesus.

Look at the picture of Jesus

9For the entire fullness of God’s nature dwells bodily in Christ, 10and you have been filled by him, who is the head over every ruler and authority.

This is saying so much that is important and helpful. Although something inside us is very empty, our lives totally filled by Jesus

Anything that seems to say “Jesus is fine” but if you practice “this”, if you manifest _____, life really then becomes full, becomes suspect

The life regularly filled with peace, hope, connection, purpose, patience, self-control strength, meaning, community, love comes through Jesus

If you’re going to offer your life to anyone, wouldn’t you choose the only one who can fill your life like that?

11You were also circumcised in him with a circumcision not done with hands, by putting off the body of flesh, in the circumcision of Christ, 12when you were buried with him in baptism,

Something self-destructive inside us is pulling the wrong direction – Our sinful flesh definitely dealt with by Jesus

When you read “body of flesh,”(11, 13) don’t think skin and organs; one theologian says in the Bible our flesh is more like the mind dominated by unrestrained impulses, not in harmony with God or his will, rebellious, hostile; it just sabotages your Christian walk, but it sabotages your life

We want our flesh reined in. No system, guru, program is going to give you mastery. You could gain some self-control, but if something’s wrong with your heart, you need help.

The picture of circumcision in the Old Testament was one that marked off the people of God physically. But, in the New Testament, the application of circumcision gets changed. This is fully spiritual, all about the heart. No longer for a single family/tribe, but the work God does is global.

Spiritually something has been done for you, for your flesh. Old part of you taken away, buried. Baptism symbolizes the burial, doesn’t it. We baptize those who say, “yes” this has happened to me.

The part of you that is unrestrained, in God’s eyes, has been dealt with, and God is working in your life bringing the full reality of that to fruition. If you’re going to sign over the agenda of your life to anyone, it would be someone who could deal with this side of you

12b you were also raised with him through faith in the working of God, who raised him from the dead. 13And when you were dead in trespasses and in the uncircumcision of your flesh, he made you alive with him and forgave us all our trespasses.

We were once dead spiritually on the inside, but now our dead existence completely made alive through Jesus

We are raised with him, not because we found a 7 step-plan to work our way from being dead or mostly dead, to being slightly alive, to really alive.

God did something for us through Jesus. We are relying on the fact that he is alive. And just as God raised Jesus, your life is raised. We are made alive with him.

The subject of trespasses came up in 13. Sin/trespasses bring about such a sad death in our relationship with God. We’re really stuck. And yet as Christ rises, those trespasses are let go. Death is over, life has come.

If you’re going to offer up your life as a willing sacrifice to anyone, wouldn’t it be him?

14He erased the certificate of debt, with its obligations, that was against us and opposed to us, and has taken it away by nailing it to the cross.

It is worth working hard to appreciate. Imagine some sort of official, binding certificate. It communicates your debt, “here’s your obligations, here’s what you legally owe because of your sin.” That would be awful, it would be hard to not feel the power exerted over you because of it.

Imagine it’s taken, and in a dramatic, almost violent scene it is nailed to the cross of Jesus as he pays that debt. On the other side of that, now all obligations are gone, free, clear, no fines, penalties, probation, consider the matter completely settled and closed

Something could be held against us – Our guilty record permanently cleared by Jesus

The power of shame and guilt dealt with. I am not sure it’s even been more important to remember that.

We easily minimize or blameshift; we are taught to “show ourselves grace, to forgive ourselves.” I don’t want you under an unbearable weight, but what if you’ve deeply hurt people, or what if you just need to change. How does that help?

So much better to look to one who has love for you that isn’t conditioned on anything from you, submit to him, hear the words of truth/grace, think of the cross. Allow yourself to go down this road…What if it’s true? What if God really has forgiven everything? What if every bit of what could be held against us has been canceled and erased? Instead of a reminder of all your problematic failures, it tells a story of Jesus’ success

if you’re going to say, “you call the shots” to anyone, isn’t this the One!

15He disarmed the rulers and authorities and disgraced them publicly; he triumphed over them in him.

I don’t go here all the time, evil forces aligned against you; strategy to steal, kill, destroy

Disarmed – No more capabilities to harmDisgraced – public exposure as evil and powerless (no deceit)Triumphed – High stakes and a clear victory (parades, trophy presentations). Losers need to be exposed because they cause so much damage and hurt and wreckage

Something opposes us – Our enemies soundly defeated by Jesus

Conclusion:  What really blew me away in this passage was how things got really turned upside down. If you were in Jerusalem on a day near Passover, and you saw Jesus hanging, you would think, “if he did have any power, it’s been completely taken away. You would see a disgraced man, and you would conclude Rome, chief priests triumphed.

And that would be very accurate in one sense. Everything seems to indicate that the cross was such a great act of humiliation, that the only person experiencing open shame was Jesus Christ as he hung on the cross.

But what looked like the greatest act of humiliation was actually the greatest victory for Jesus. He is not losing, he is conquering. He is not being disgraced, his Father is looking at his beloved son, and sees this moment as great honor.

We benefit from it all. The triumph Jesus won is our triumph. The fact that our spiritually enemies were disgraced means that we won’t carry the shame. This is the greatest news we could ever find, this is the deepest love we could ever know. This is Jesus who draws near as a triumphant victor, ready to call you His friend. Hallelujah, what a Savior. Amen.