THE PRAYER THAT SHAPES US FOCUSING OUR PRAYER MATTHEW 6:9-10

INTRO: If you had to rate your communication with God, particularly your speaking to Him (what we refer to as prayer), how is it going? I know it’s not an easy question. And, it wouldn’t surprise me at all if most of us wish we were doing better.

When it comes to communicating with God, are you eager to take things to God that really are front and center: work drama, family concerns, future burdens (things you dread), spiritual challenges (where you are not where you want to be), rational/irrational fears? Do you know where to start?

Are those the things you should be communicating to God about, or are there others?

Do you have any set patterns or rhythms? Is it: I try regularly to work through a list, or always at these times

Prayer often is a good indicator of how you and God are doing. Jesus knew this. If you are in need of some help, realize that Jesus often would bring up the subject of prayer. He even gave us a model prayer, which we have called “The Lord’s Prayer.” Prayer that Shapes Us

There’s never been anyone closer to the Father, so when he spends time teaching his disciples how to communicate with our Heavenly Father, Christians have tuned in, and I want you to see how this prayer shapes our lives.

If you sense you are inconsistent, distracted, discouraged, and even uncertain what to pray and how to pray, there is help.

When Jesus says “pray like this,” he gives us a real pattern. A pattern is different from a formula (which you follow verbatim to get the same result every time.) Communicating with God will never be reduced to a formula.

And we should know that prayer will not be reduced to a transaction. So much of our lives are like this (gumball machine, ATM – remember the code, and if you have enough in there).

We’re going to read a couple of verses.

9“Therefore, you should pray like this: Our Father in heaven, your name be honored as holy. 10Your kingdom come. Your will be done on earth as it is in heaven.

I am going to use the language of focus today. If we come to prayer and we’re distracted, at the beginning of the day, we just are thinking what’s ahead, in the middle of the day, a lot is going on, at the end of the day, we may be carrying more than we should. What if there was a way to focus our hearts? The way Jesus is teaching us to pray, he is focusing our hearts and I want to highlight three ways that he focuses our heart within the first few words of the prayer he gave us. With his help we can focus on Relationship, Priorities, Perspective.

Imagine, I am getting ready to communicate with God, with this prayer Jesus gave us I have a…

RELATIONSHIP FOCUS

The prayer opens with a specific address: our Father in heaven.

Every time we use this pattern, we’re helpfully reminded of a relationship we have with God. Think of several dimensions here.

Father – He is not just Sovereign King, Lord of Armies, Master of everyone and everything, Almighty. That’s the normal language of religion and prayer. There is a deity, and it often seems really impersonal even distant.

But those who have experienced saving grace [turned, trusted] have a distinct designation: Father. Before Jesus initiated this way of praying, people did NOT pray that way, and yet that is the prime way He taught us to pray. Think about the meaning and privilege of that.

We are children of God (not just Christians, Christ-followers, church going people). But we are children of God. We are in His family.

So, as part of our communication, what if multiple times a week, we focused on the privilege we have of speaking to Him. How valuable.

He is OUR Father. As part of the relationship focus, we recognize we are part of a wider family. This is plural and as much as a relationship with God is personal, it’s not exclusive

So, my praying absorbs the fact that I am not alone in talking to God.

That’s a good reminder that it could really help my prayer life to pray with friends. To hear them pray, to concentrate with them, to recognize I don’t have a monopoly on God, and I don’t need to.

Our Father IN HEAVEN – Father who sees with the vantage point of heaven

Higher perspective than I have on earth. Eternal plan that predates me by years and years and years Unlimited power that can accomplish every task, all at the same time Infinite love directed toward billions of individuals without anyone getting overlooked

How often during the day would a focus like this be helpful. Could you do that once a day? Could you join me in doing something like this 3x a day?

I am getting ready to communicate with God, with this prayer Jesus gave us I can focus on relationships, but there’s also a focus on…

PRIORITIES

Notice what comes first when we pray. It isn’t our needs. Our needs are important, and we get to them in this prayer Jesus gave us. But notice, that’s not where this prayer starts. When the requests start rolling, it is God first. That’s our priority.

Priority #1: God’s NAME. May your name be honored, may it be hallowed, set apart as holy

A name represents character, who someone is. What could it mean that God has revealed his name.  Exodus 3 is a really holy chapter, we learn his name is YHWH, and his name is holy, set apart. We reverence his name, not using it in a vain or empty way

Here, we’re praying that his name would have the weight it deserves.

And yet, we can be easily consumed with making our name great, or what people think of us, and the reputation we have. But, even people who are pretty well known are forgotten. His name stands.

This helps to correct that impulse. Imagine correcting that each morning or right in the middle of a work day.  [Decision you have to make]

A few writers cross-reference this passage with Ezekiel 36. God speaks to a very disobedient nation, and He speaks of his name.

Instead of honoring his name, people, God’s people have gone the opposite direction. Tying God to so many dishonorable things. God promises to act in a decisive way FOR his name.

23I will honor the holiness of my great name, which has been profaned among the nations—the name you have profaned among them. The nations will know that I am the Lord—this is the declaration of the Lord God—when I demonstrate my holiness through you in their sight.

Sounds a lot like the prayer Jesus taught us to pray. But what is the result?

What comes of that? You can read the rest of the chapter and God gathers his people, cleanses, gives a new heart, and a new spirit. He places his Spirit, causes fresh obedience, he relates to them as their very personal God, he saves.

And that’s embedded in the prayer to make his name holy. We pray for God’s name to be marked as holy

Another priority in our prayers is GOD’S KINGDOM (priorities slide)

The Kingdom of God in the Bible is a deep subject, and has complexities.

On one hand it arrives, when Jesus comes, the Kingdom is at hand, has drawn near (Matthew 3,4). The kingdom is attached to salvation, the restoration of all things

We also know that Jesus said his kingdom wasn’t of this world (Jn 18:36). Actually, the kingdom is about righteousness, peace and joy in the Spirit according to Romans 14:17.

We’re waiting for the kingdom to come, where the Son of Man sits on his throne (19:28)

For now, we’re meant to seek his kingdom (6:33)

Seek his kingdom: But do we? Sometimes in meetings, it’s helpful to do a thought experiment…I will tell someone “let’s imagine a world where you are king.” A friend who will remain nameless told me…”I like that world.”

He’s honest, right? We can easily be consumed with my own kingdom: everything that supports me being in charge

I am in control, I get my own way, I am indulged, served, I am right, and all the people in my life serve my agenda and for my pleasure, all the systems bend to me. MY kingdom comes.

Two things about that: (1) exact opposite of this request, and (2) if I am honest, that becomes petty, really small, really quickly.

I know that because one day Jesus was talking about how he would have to suffer before entering into the kingdom, and his disciples found themselves jockeying for position in the kingdom of God. They miss big stuff God was doing, because they’re imagining their own little kingdoms

But what if on a Wednesday, we spent 2 minutes going through the things weighing on us. We bring our list, what has us stressed, people that matter to us, and just spent time praying for God to rule and to reign and give us signs of his kingdom.

A third priority is GOD’S WILL. Your will be done

The phrase “God’s will” also has some complexity to it.

In the Psalms we’re told that our God is in heaven he does whatever he pleases

Not everyone who says “Lord” actually does His will (Mat 7)

Those who do the will of the Father are united to Jesus (Mat 12), but this implies there are people who choose NOT to do it.

We know that. Somewhere embedded in the heart of every toddler is, “I want my will to be done.”

Starts off as “innocent”, becomes not so cute. Then as we grow up (kind of), grown up ways of throwing tantrums, or being passive-aggressive, or giving someone the silent treatment, or ______. We do whatever we can to establish our will.

How different is the way of Jesus. Jesus in a moment of great agony and great clarity prays “not my will, but yours be done.” [Matthew 26:39, 42, 44]

Is it a priority of mine that God’s will is done?

Even if it is difficult and involves sacrifice. Even as my will doesn’t unfold in the lives of my family or in the timing of situations

I want to follow Jesus here, but getting our own way is really important to us. In moments of clarity, we can be honest: I think I know what I want, or maybe even I definitely know what I want

job, relationship, make the purchase, advance, be finished, feel better, kid to thrive, easier path, people not to be difficult

But we realize, I am not smarter, I don’t know what’s better

So some of those minutes on Tuesday, submitting your heart to God’s will. This has an effect of bearing the fruit of actually doing God’s will. You begin to process the bad news and the person not doing well.

There’s one more phrase I want to focus on: “On earth as it is in heaven”

There is some debate as to whether that attaches to the last phrase (your will be done), or if it’s attached to all three (will, kingdom, name). I am inclined to think it attaches to all three. This helps me

REFOCUS MY PERSPECTIVE

As my mind is directed to heaven, I get a lengthier perspective than I am accustomed to thinking about. Heaven is really the perfect presence of God, unseen realm where God rules.

As I center on that, I recognize that one day, there will be new heavens and a new earth = no tears, no thorns, death, no sorrow, security, love, no need for light, peace, worship. We want that one day, but as we communicate with God, could we ask for that to touch down in some small way (in this situation, home, life). On earth as it is in heaven.

But I also need to make sure I read this carefully (on EARTH as it is in heaven). It’s easy to think personally – in my life, may all these good things happen (name honored, kingdom arrives, will is done). And that’s a really good thing to pray to happen.

Maybe we could expand it more – in our church, with your people who are yours, may all this happen. That’s not a bad thing to pray

On earth = Gives us a wider view. Our heartbeat is that the EARTH would operate this way, experience this (not just our lives, church)

Our country, the nations of the world. Peace, harmony, justice, gospel-flourishing – expand that everywhere. War, all unrighteousness, persecution would be over. That God would change hearts, and entire cultures [use local believers, send missionaries]. We have a new horizon for our prayers. We pray them for the entire earth.

Sometimes we need to widen things out. I got a glimpse of that. Astronauts from the Artemis mission earlier this year. This is one of the pictures they took with the moon in the foreground. It’s called the “Earthset.” They saw the earth from 250,000 miles away. It seems so small, and yet you realize there are billions of people on that little ball hanging in space. So, there, may your kingdom come, will be done, name be honored.

On earth as it is in heaven. Take what’s on your heart, what God has brought to mind, and then maybe you pray with a wider perspective.

Conclusion

Our Lord gave us a pattern, and our plan is to go deeper into that pattern in the upcoming weeks, but what about this week.

My real hope is that you would take a minute or two, or 5 or 10 of every single day this week, morning, midday, bedtime. You can start with yourself, others, have a list, journal, cluttered heart/mind.

Remember the “OUR” language!  If possible, pray with someone, or maybe text someone how you prayed for them.

God would take the pattern of this prayer, and you could use it to grow in communicating with God.  As you do this, you will be shaped.

<><><><><>

7.5.2026  Brainerd Baptist Church