BEHIND THE SCENES THE UNLOVABLE VILLAIN ESTHER 5-6

INTRODUCTION: Do you know of the concept of a “lovable villain”? In series, books, movies, a lovable villain doesn’t start out as the “good guy”, but actually over the course of the story, you realize that he’s not that bad, there’s so many charming characteristics, you end up cheering for them. I think my favorite is Gru from Despicable Me. Such a fun character.

We’ve started on the lighter side, but the man named Haman in the book of Esther [series slide] is the furthest thing from a lovable villain you can imagine. In the end, he’s not misunderstood, he’s evil, and in the end everyone’s happy when he gets what’s coming to him.

Esther 4 left us with a cliffhanger last week, we have 4 main characters

The very high official named Haman has convinced the Persian King Ahasuerus to issue a decree to kill every Jew

A Jew named Mordecai, a father figure to Queen Esther has urged her to use her position and approach the king and plead for her people, the Jews. It was a dramatic moment.

Mordecai says, “You’re here for such a time as this.” Esther says “If I perish, I perish” and calls for a fast for her and this moment.

The spotlight’s been on Mordecai/Esther. Now it really shifts to Haman in chapters 5-6.

A quick word. I’m taking a different approach today. Preaching profs: you normally organize around a big idea, main points, sub points

Passages like this one are better served with me walking you through a gallery – highlight a few things, but the story carries the weight. It speaks for itself. In a moment, we’ll piece together some things I believe the Lord has for us.

1On the third day, Esther dressed in her royal clothing and stood in the inner courtyard of the palace facing it. The king was sitting on his royal throne in the royal courtroom, facing its entrance. 2As soon as the king saw Queen Esther standing in the courtyard, she gained favor with him. The king extended the gold scepter in his hand toward Esther, and she approached and touched the tip of the scepter. 3“What is it, Queen Esther?” the king asked her. “Whatever you want, even to half the kingdom, will be given to you.” 4“If it pleases the king,” Esther replied, “may the king and Haman come today to the banquet I have prepared for them.” 5The king said, “Hurry, and get Haman so we can do as Esther has requested.” So the king and Haman went to the banquet Esther had prepared.

All the drama of “If I perish, I perish” is quickly gone. We’re reminded that Esther’s favored. She’s going to be okay. She’s the queen!

The king offers “half the kingdom.” FWIW, kings rarely meant that, but they like to appear large and in charge. Also, Haman is coming back into the picture because of Queen Esther’s request.

More banquets, more wine…

6While drinking the wine, the king asked Esther, “Whatever you ask will be given to you. Whatever you want, even to half the kingdom, will be done.” 7Esther answered, “This is my petition and my request: 8If I have found favor in the eyes of the king, and if it pleases the king to grant my petition and perform my request, may the king and Haman come to the banquet I will prepare for them. Tomorrow I will do what the king has asked.”

What will the request be (drumroll)? “Let’s do this again.” Maybe seems like a letdown. And yet, some of the most critical things will happen between banquet 1 and 2.

There’s (1) an incident with Haman and Mordecai on Haman’s way out of the palace, and (2) a sleepless night for the King.

9That day Haman left full of joy and in good spirits. But when Haman saw Mordecai at the King’s Gate, and Mordecai didn’t rise or tremble in fear at his presence, Haman was filled with rage toward Mordecai. 10Yet Haman controlled himself and went home. He sent for his friends and his wife Zeresh to join him. 11Then Haman described for them his glorious wealth and his many sons. He told them all how the king had honored him and promoted him in rank over the other officials and the royal staff. 12“What’s more,” Haman added, “Queen Esther invited no one but me to join the king at the banquet she had prepared. I am invited again tomorrow to join her with the king. 13Still, none of this satisfies me since I see Mordecai the Jew sitting at the King’s Gate all the time.”

We see In Haman, this unreasonable need for status recognition by every single person. And we also see nauseating pride.

Gather ‘round, and let me tell you how much money I have Look at my boys, how about how they’ve grown up If you haven’t heard, I am a pretty big deal – I’ve been honored. I’m in charge of a lot of people and important stuff I’ve attained some exclusive status – 1 of 1 now Look at my bright future – this is the way I roll now (tomorrow)

If you’re standing around over hors d’oeuvres, how obnoxious is this? Is this the guy you want to stand next to? Another 15 minutes of this?

But then there’s the disproportionate anger: “none of this means anything.” He’s got a problem, his wife has a solution, much like Jezebel did.

14His wife Zeresh and all his friends told him, “Have them build a gallows seventy-five feet tall. Ask the king in the morning to hang Mordecai on it. Then go to the banquet with the king and enjoy yourself.” The advice pleased Haman, so he had the gallows constructed.

She’s got a really simple solution. When you begin to feel like you have more power, you do bolder things. You act on personal vendettas. It seems like we have a late-night (overnight construction project).

The breadcrumb strategically placed from the end of chapter 2 where Mordecai saved the king’s life, we’re picking up now.

1That night sleep escaped the king, so he ordered the book recording daily events to be brought and read to the king. 2They found the written report of how Mordecai had informed on Bigthana and Teresh, two of the king’s eunuchs who guarded the entrance, when they planned to assassinate King Ahasuerus. 3The king inquired, “What honor and special recognition have been given to Mordecai for this act?” The king’s personal attendants replied, “Nothing has been done for him.” 4The king asked, “Who is in the court?” Now Haman was just entering the outer court of the palace to ask the king to hang Mordecai on the gallows he had prepared for him. 5The king’s attendants answered him, “Haman is there, standing in the court.” “Have him enter,” the king ordered.

We sense what’s going to happen don’t we? We feel how it all is lining up.

Were the attendants big fans of Haman (“we know just the guy who can help you, King”)? It’s just too good of a set up! They know where Mr. Big Shot’s head will be.

6Haman entered, and the king asked him, “What should be done for the man the king wants to honor?” Haman thought to himself, “Who is it the king would want to honor more than me?” 7Haman told the king, “For the man the king wants to honor: 8Have them bring a royal garment that the king himself has worn and a horse the king himself has ridden, which has a royal crown on its head. 9Put the garment and the horse under the charge of one of the king’s most noble officials. Have them clothe the man the king wants to honor, parade him on the horse through the city square, and call out before him, ‘This is what is done for the man the king wants to honor.’ ” 10The king told Haman, “Hurry, and do just as you proposed. Take a garment and a horse for Mordecai the Jew, who is sitting at the King’s Gate. Do not leave out anything you have suggested.” 11So Haman took the garment and the horse. He clothed Mordecai and paraded him through the city square, calling out before him, “This is what is done for the man the king wants to honor.” 12Then Mordecai returned to the King’s Gate, but Haman hurried off for home, mournful and with his head covered.

Not to make light of it, but Haman is having a Terrible, Horrible, No Good, Very Bad Day.

13Haman told his wife Zeresh and all his friends everything that had happened. His advisers and his wife Zeresh said to him, “Since Mordecai is Jewish, and you have begun to fall before him, you won’t overcome him, because your downfall is certain.” 14While they were still speaking with him, the king’s eunuchs arrived and rushed Haman to the banquet Esther had prepared.

Anyone who really was close to Haman isn’t wanting to stay close. Can you sense the immediate isolation?

Friends – quickly disappear Wise men – you’ve really messed up, we tried to tell you! Wife – what were YOU thinking (she doesn’t mention her role in this)

Haman still doesn’t even know the worst part of this, does he? The doorbell rings. He’s got a banquet he’s being rushed to.

Step back and it seems like people in the book of Esther have categories for things being destined to happen, even superstitious things. We say coincidence, karma, fate, not in the cards, the stars, planets not aligned, chance, or bad luck.

All the “coincidences.” If Mordecai hadn’t found out, if he hadn’t been previously overlooked, if the king hadn’t had a sleepless night, if the attendants had read something else, if Haman hadn’t felt the need to get to the court early and be there just at that moment.

Someone has said ‘a coincidence is a miracle in which God prefers to remain anonymous.’  Maybe a better way to describe it is providence

Providence is the almighty and ever-present power of God by which God upholds, as with his hand, heaven and earth and all creatures, and so rules them that leaf and blade, rain and drought, fruitful and lean years, food and drink, health and sickness, prosperity and poverty—all things, in fact, come to us not by chance but by his fatherly hand.” (Heidelberg)

We are seeing the invisible God at work.

Coming back to the story, what strikes me is that all of this is so plausible. We aren’t having a hard time connecting the dots. There aren’t plot gaps. The story stands on its own, and we need to let it do some soul-searching in our hearts.

I think it’s helpful to visualize some things, and maybe map it out.

SEEDS of AN IDOL – An idol is something that becomes not just important or desirable, but it’s ultimate (more important than God).

For Haman it seems like what really mattered to him was recognition, esteem. You notice 6 times the repeated refrain “the King wants to honor.” Nothing seems to matter more to Haman than that! Anything short than absolutely everyone recognizing him was crushing and very irritating. We get to hear his dream scenario. This is who he is. This is what he has to have! That’s where it starts.

UNCHECKED GROWTH – Seeds expand. His dreams were coming true. Lots of power. It’s what he wanted, what made him happy/fulfilled. We needed to see an example full-strength, ridiculous proportions.

“COINCIDENCE” STORM – Again, I am using coincidence in an ironic way. No one outruns their pride. You reap what you sow. God sees, God judges. This isn’t a game. You will stand before God. And life blows apart. The foolish man built his house upon the sand.

DESERVED DOWNFALL – We do NOT have a lovable villain. No one is cheering for Haman, no one rushes in saying, “give the guy a chance.”

It’s hard not to roll your eyes at Haman. We also flinch, we resolve not to be him. Haman is such a marked man whose stock is failing, heading toward destruction.

Psalm 7:14–16 14See, the wicked one is pregnant with evil, conceives trouble, and gives birth to deceit. 15He dug a pit and hollowed it out but fell into the hole he had made. 16His trouble comes back on his own head; his own violence comes down on top of his head.

And all of this is so much more than a hypothetical warning. That’s not who we want to be, and by God’s grace that’s not where many of you are.

And yet in moments of honesty, as much as I want to avoid this conclusion, there is way too much Haman in me, in my heart. I’d like to see a world of distance, and yet some patterns seem very real. Given the right/wrong set of circumstances, this could be me.

There are SEEDS in my heart.  Is it recognition for you, power, approval, control, stuff, image, connections, security, health? What is becoming ultimate to you, that, if you lost it, would devastate you?

Do you understand there is rebellion in you, corruption, betrayal, brokenness, selfishness? Those seeds are there!

God in his grace keeps so much stuff in check, but what it our hearts were left unchecked? We can tell ourselves we mean well. What if you had it all? So, likely you can’t act on everything, but it’s still there, isn’t it.

When Johnny-9-year-old brags it’s one thing (it’s just small), when he grows up and doesn’t change, it’s unsufferable

Searches on Google reveal lust or covetousness (even if it’s not full blown), broken promises, credit card that says you’re in way over your head, curating an image (you check the likes a couple trillion times a day), verbal cheap shots taken at others knocks them down, makes you look good

All sorts of justifications, escape, not on the Haman level, but certainly on the same trajectory. It may be held in check, but what if it wasn’t.

This is our story – We all have the seeds of Haman in us. Our spiritual biography doesn’t look good. The Bible repeatedly spells this out

Romans 3:11–12  11No one seeks God. 12All have turned away; all have become worthless. There is no one who does what is good, not even one.

Ephesians 2 – dead in trespasses

Titus 3:3 3We were once foolish, disobedient, deceived, enslaved by various passions/pleasures, living in malice/envy, hateful, detesting one another.

Left to our own, it wouldn’t be hard to imagine a scenario like Haman. A moment of reckoning. Your position not nearly what you thought it would be. Alone. No help is coming. No prospect of hope. Everyone that matters walks away. I am not sure you can fully appreciate your condition before God, without seeing this clearly.

Losing the things that made you you. Everything stripped away. To the point where you can’t recover. Sin when it is finished brings death. The wages/payment of sin is death.

If it’s a horrible discovery to see some of Haman in my life, I also know that honesty that brings repentance and faith is exactly where Jesus meets us. That’s exactly how coming to Jesus will change your story.

It’s astonishing. Jesus doesn’t just give a helping hand. In the gospels, he identifies with humble sinners who turn to Him, even those who have a track record with Haman-like qualities.

Everything “happens” to line up against JESUS (crowds, Judas, Pilate). But at that very moment he is identifying WITH us, uniting us TO himself, and dying for us. [CROSS]

Jesus identifies with shameful sinners on the cross. Remember it’s on the cross, where the theif says, “Lord, remember me.” It’s not as if he’s standing in solidarity with all the good guys out there who did their best to make a difference. He is counted among the sinners. He becomes sin for us, even though he knew no sin.

Do we realize how people were ashamed of Him? We didn’t value him, he was despised (Isaiah 53). One betrays, one denies, all his closest followers run away, leave him stranded.

There is a shame that always goes with a cross, but Hebrews 12:2 says Jesus despised the shame NOT US.

Jesus experiences all of this, so that you wouldn’t have to. He tastes the outcome of fools like self-centered Haman, and like you and me, so that we might be spared, rescued. Instead of falling we rise. We have new life (Heart).

Have you humbled yourself before Him? Have you turned from everything else? Do you see Him coming to your rescue today? If you haven’t, why wouldn’t you? What would prevent you?

And for those who can identify with deserving judgment, and needing grace, and finding it in Jesus Christ, there is an invitation for you. We come to a time of communion. We remember His body, His blood.

<><><><><>

8.23.2026    Brainerd Baptist Church