BEHIND THE SCENES MORE THAN MEETS THE EYE ESTHER 2

INTRO:  Have you ever found yourself watching a movie that you saw a long time ago, but when you go back, a few minutes in, you think: “Man, that was rough!” Language, scenes, innuendo, prejudice, it must’ve gone over my head a bit, or my memory filtered it out. Sometimes I think Esther (series) is like that. Not inappropriate at all, but definitely challenging in so many ways, maybe even not what we remembered.

We’re in chapter 2 today. I hope to land in 2 spots

Big picture – what’s going on in the WORLD Get specific – what’s going on with a few INDIVIDUALS

2:1–4 1Some time later, when King Ahasuerus’s rage had cooled down, he remembered Vashti, what she had done, and what was decided against her. 2The king’s personal attendants suggested, “Let a search be made for beautiful young virgins for the king. 3Let the king appoint commissioners in each province of his kingdom, so that they may gather all the beautiful young virgins to the harem at the fortress of Susa. Put them under the supervision of Hegai, the king’s eunuch, keeper of the women, and give them the required beauty treatments. 4Then the young woman who pleases the king will become queen instead of Vashti.” This suggestion pleased the king, and he did accordingly.

What’s going on in this WORLD

These verses connect dots. In chapter 1, for all of his power, we have zero confidence in the rule of king Ahasuerus/Xerxes. “Some time later” means after he got rid of his wife Vashti because she didn’t comply with an order he made while he was drunk. He seems silly.

It’s written (almost from his perspective) as if he hadn’t really done anything; things happened, decisions were made.

We know something from world history. He’s coming back to Persia fresh off defeat in Greece. Coming back, no Vashti, no queen.

This world isn’t a pretty picture. A king with absolute authority who has few ideas of his own who seems willing to exploit others for his pleasure.

Eunuchs and a Harem. reminder that there are young boys/men who were chosen just like these young, beautiful virgins will be chosen, and their sole object is to serve at the pleasure of the king, even if that costs them sexually (the king’s pleasure, body and soul)

This is a rough picture, and unfortunately in lots of places/parts of our world where powerful people still exploit. Again to summarize

World powers rising and falling, unstable governing authorities Advisors who seem foolish, young men/women left vulnerable

In the middle of an unstable world, God is at work. He hasn’t stepped back for a minute. We learned last week that in Esther we have to train ourselves to see the unseen God. Often in Scripture, it’s right up front.

Psalm 46:1–3 1God is our refuge and strength, a helper who is always found in times of trouble. 2Therefore we will not be afraid, though the earth trembles and the mountains topple into the depths of the seas, 3though its water roars and foams and the mountains quake with its turmoil.

Proverbs 21:1 – A king’s heart is like channeled water in the Lord’s hand: He directs it wherever he chooses.

Daniel 2:21 – He changes the times and seasons; he removes kings and establishes kings. He gives wisdom to the wise and knowledge to those who have understanding.

Psalm 135:6 – The Lord does whatever he pleases in heaven and on earth, in the seas and all the depths.

What other Scriptures would you add or can you share? In Esther, God’s work is more hidden, behind the scenes.

But yes God is still at work, even in this chaos, and the messes we make, the messes we have to deal with, or are responsible to clean up.

How are things going in your world. Do you feel the world is broken? It can regularly feel like this world is unstable.

Anything you watch: it’s awful, worse than it’s ever been.

Closer to home – work is a mess, decisions are looming, health scare has your attention, crisis at home, anxiety is building, your heart is troubled, a million things you are caring about and no one to share it with, lonely, angry, your decision-making is going off the rails.

God IS at work. God is here and present.

You need reminders of that in your personal time of reading and reflection, but you regularly need to be around other Christians who can remind you of that.

In the middle of an unstable world, God is at work. Let’s keep reading, because we’re going to see the main human characters of this book. This isn’t just an ancient story of empires. Let’s meet two individuals

2:5–7 5In the fortress of Susa, there was a Jewish man named Mordecai son of Jair, son of Shimei, son of Kish, a Benjaminite. 6Kish had been taken into exile from Jerusalem with the other captives when King Nebuchadnezzar of Babylon took King Jeconiah of Judah into exile. 7Mordecai was the legal guardian of his cousin Hadassah (that is, Esther), because she had no father or mother. The young woman had a beautiful figure and was extremely good-looking. When her father and mother died, Mordecai had adopted her as his own daughter.

What’s going on with these INDIVIDUALS?

Esther and Mordecai. Just a reminder: these are Israelites, Jews, living in Persia. They have been taken into exile (low point in the history of the nation of Israel). They live, but don’t ever quite feel like they fit.

500 miles point-to-point (Jerusalem to Babylon) + 225 miles (to Susa) 115 years from the deportation mentioned

Maybe, those who have emigrated from their home country understand that (refugees). Or maybe if you have ever been in a situation where your culture isn’t the majority culture. Perhaps you understand the vulnerability.

For Esther: She’s an exile, and an orphan, but also cared for.

She is beautiful, but will that become an asset or be a liability in this world? We quickly connect her beauty to what is going on at this time, that doesn’t necessarily give us encouragement.

Did you notice her Hebrew name is Hadassah, but she’s known as Esther? This is one of the hard parts of living in Susa. Almost a double identity. Was that wanted, or just is what it is? Mordecai is named after Marduk a Babylonian god.

At first, Mordecai and Esther seem worlds away from the king, palace, banquets, parties, power.  These people and THOSE people

2:8–11 8When the king’s command and edict became public knowledge and when many young women were gathered at the fortress of Susa under Hegai’s supervision, Esther was taken to the palace, into the supervision of Hegai, keeper of the women. 9The young woman pleased him and gained his favor so that he accelerated the process of the beauty treatments and the special diet that she received. He assigned seven hand-picked female servants to her from the palace and transferred her and her servants to the harem’s best quarters. 10Esther did not reveal her ethnicity or her family background, because Mordecai had ordered her not to make them known. 11Every day Mordecai took a walk in front of the harem’s courtyard to learn how Esther was doing and to see what was happening to her.

We’re getting hints of what is going on, aren’t we?

Esther “was taken.” (8)  This is not really the world where you “opt-out,” especially if you are in Esther’s position.

She receives favor from Hegai. (9)

Her nationality/religion seems more harmful than helpful. (10). And Mordecai is looking out for her each step of the way, role of looking out for people (11)

All in all, it’s a really complex scenario.

2:12–14 12During the year before each young woman’s turn to go to King Ahasuerus, the harem regulation required her to receive beauty treatments with oil of myrrh for six months and then with perfumes and cosmetics for another six months. 13When the young woman would go to the king, she was given whatever she requested to take with her from the harem to the palace. 14She would go in the evening, and in the morning she would return to a second harem under the supervision of the king’s eunuch Shaashgaz, keeper of the concubines. She never went to the king again, unless he desired her and summoned her by name.

Scripture gives us a modest description, but it is reality. You can leave neat, tidy princess fairytales to Disney. This isn’t that.

We might be a little too familiar with reality shows. This isn’t a make believe world of the Bachelor. No one is on the red carpet, the runway, and this isn’t a made-for-TV beauty pageant. I think we should be more prepared to cringe.

For many of the young women, this is likely the worst moment imaginable. We weren’t there, and maybe some young lady thought that this could advance her goals, but for more this is a moment of degradation. Not really a rags-to-riches story. Another day, another virgin comes in.

Transferred from here to there. Housing arrangements. No future, no family, no kids, no grandkids. Eat, Sleep. Available

We can sensationalize, even glamorize a quick “naughty, steamy” hookup. We know better, don’t we?

2:15–18 15Esther was the daughter of Abihail, the uncle of Mordecai who had adopted her as his own daughter. When her turn came to go to the king, she did not ask for anything except what Hegai, the king’s eunuch, keeper of the women, suggested. Esther gained favor in the eyes of everyone who saw her. 16She was taken to King Ahasuerus in the palace in the tenth month, the month Tebeth, in the seventh year of his reign. 17The king loved Esther more than all the other women. She won more favor and approval from him than did any of the other virgins. He placed the royal crown on her head and made her queen in place of Vashti. 18The king held a great banquet for all his officials and staff. It was Esther’s banquet. He freed his provinces from tax payments and gave gifts worthy of the king’s bounty.

If you haven’t read Esther in a while, or you just always thought “beauty pageant winner” angle, you can sense just how challenging this portion of Esther is. You might have lots of questions. That’s understandable. In this case, I’m not sure how valuable it is to ask “what would you do, in the same scenario?”

Last week I mentioned that we’re reading for more than morals.

If you want to raise questions about marrying an unbeliever, sleeping with someone who is not your spouse, there are definitely places to go in Scripture where it speaks very definitively.

From Scripture, we also don’t really know Esther’s emotional state, what realistic options were available to her.

We just know that there Esther is, and God has a plan even in the broken world of Susa. Here’s what I do want us to take away

Esther won’t be a nameless member of the harem. She’s different. She is a person with an identity (15). Notice her name. Notice that she is someone’s daughter (Abihail).  She has a people (Jewish). She’s part of a family (Mordecai is a relative). Again and again, we’re meant to see her. She isn’t just an object

Esther receives so much favor in a harsh world. Whether it’s Hegai, Mordecai, the king, they treat her with favor.  At the end of this day, it’s Esther’s banquet. All of that comes with caveats and questions, but the theme is unmistakable. You are meant to see it.

In a vulnerable broken world, God cares for people. Each story in Scripture looks so different. In Esther, God’s care seems to be behind-the-scenes. In so many other places, it’s out in the open

Joseph, Daniel – God is showing favor

Exodus 2:23–25 23After a long time, the Israelites groaned because of their difficult labor, they cried out, and their cry for help labor ascended to God. 24God heard their groaning, and God remembered his covenant. 25God saw the Israelites, and God knew.

Ezekiel 16 – story of God’s love for Israel despite abandonment of him

NT – Care of Jesus for a woman at the well, widows, Peter who had failed (on and on this goes)

We’re trying to train our hearts to see God’s care even when we have questions. I see it in Scripture and I see it elsewhere.

And there are your stories, your lives. Friend this week – rescued from being orphaned, attempting suicide, drugs/alcohol, extraordinary visions, and over-the-top kindness and hospitality. This is grace!

CONCLUSION

Can we get real? I don’t think what we’ve seen is such a foreign concept.

There are deeply hurting people here – abused, neglected, mistreated, violated, cheated on, lied to, unwanted, compromised

How you were formed may seem like it has damaged you significantly! How could you ever hope to move forward? Could you believe that God really does love you deeply and completely?

And there are others (none of this is to excuse sin) who’ve made morally compromised or questionable decisions

For some there are no excuses, not that nuanced, trail of foolish decisions, deception. You’re guilty or at least compliant. What now?

And there’s also some situations, where if we took a deep breath, and swam in the deep end, where you had to swim in

We might see that you had to do what you did, bent the truth, gave in nowhere else to go, hurt people you loved, dug a hole so deep felt too lost and confused to know what to think/feel.

Maybe you remember the pressure you felt to make specific decisions, how much you hated yourself afterward.

Maybe you still have tons of regret, even though things came out of that situation that you wouldn’t change

This is life. What happens now So, can you be honest? That’s where the Lord can and will meet you!

Could you find beauty trusting in the life God’s designed for you (navigating through the hard times and the mess)

That’s not a gospel of self-empowerment. I don’t know of any other way forward, that could give some freedom from addictions, provide protection from self-harm

God’s care comes with no caveats. God shows you favor in Jesus Christ.

Favor we couldn’t earn                  Grace we never deserved Mercy when we need it the most    Hope and permanent help

It’s all wrapped in a relationship where we are called to follow, love, and obey, and God is committed to work in us to make us more like Jesus Christ, to bring us to a place of wholeness. God cares enough to have sent His only Son to live, die and rise, to reconcile you to Himself. Will you believe, turn to Him? Will you worship, follow, obey?

And as a church, can we handle that being the story He is writing in our community?

see the broken restored, find ourselves midway through restoration stories. We stay in, fight for grace, look for signs of hope

2 days from now, and maybe even 20 years it still may be challenging, but in 200,000 years, God will have restored everything that’s broken, and made all things new.

God’s Word should have the last word (question, assurance)

Romans 2:4 4Do you despise the riches of his kindness, restraint, and patience, not recognizing that God’s kindness is intended to lead you to repentance?

Lamentations 3:21–23 21I call this to mind, and therefore I have hope: 22Because of the Lord’s faithful love we do not perish, for his mercies never end. 23They are new every morning; great is your faithfulness!

<><><><><>

8.2.2026  Brainerd Baptist Church