OT REVISITED I N S E C U R I T Y SELECTED SCRIPTURES

INSECURITY – not being, not feeling safe, not having enough, not living up to something, wondering if you’re loved. All the behaviors, actions, mindsets, patterns that become a part of you because you aren’t or don’t feel secure.

I am pretty positive that I haven’t heard a whole message on insecurity and I know I haven’t preached one. It’s a large subject.

Since the fall of Adam and Eve, humans have faced insecurity. So, we could devote several messages to it, and in many ways, we’re just stepping into the water today. But I believe that step will be helpful.

Here’s our roadmap for today  [OT Series Slide]

We’ll take a whirlwind tour through the life of an insecure man named Saul in 1 Samuel. He will help us appreciate aspects of insecurity.

Pull together what insecurity looks like or might look like in OUR lives

If we struggle (I am guessing many if not most do in some ways), we will see where can we find some HELP.

So, here’s the plan: SAUL, US, and HELP

Here’s SAUL. How a person is introduced in Scripture is often significant.

9:1–2 1There was a prominent man of Benjamin named Kish… 2He had a son named Saul, an impressive young man. There was no one more impressive among the Israelites than he. He stood a head taller than anyone else.

Which makes what we hear him say later in that chapter so strange. When the prophet Samuel communicates that Saul will be king over Israel, that he would be what everyone in Israel wanted

9:21 – Saul responded, “Am I not a Benjaminite from the smallest of Israel’s tribes and isn’t my clan the least important of all the clans of the Benjaminite tribe? So why have you said something like this to me?”

Is that a clue of Saul’s mindset. It’s worth noting.

As you move through 1 Samuel, Saul is anointed by God, the Spirit rushes on him, he mobilizes an army out of almost nothing, becomes king over a nation that had never really functioned quite like that since moving into the Promised Land, leads successful military campaigns

But he regularly feels pressure to please people. So he doesn’t always quite obey. It happens in 1 Samuel 13. In chapter 15 there’s another episode in a conflict where he doesn’t completely obey the Lord, he gets confronted, and we hear a prophetic word about Saul.

15:17 17Samuel continued, “Although you once considered yourself unimportant, haven’t you become the leader of the tribes of Israel?

You’ve changed. Are you too big to obey? That seems to provoke some part of remorse, but it doesn’t seem to be genuine repentance.

15:30 30Saul said, “I have sinned. Please honor me now before the elders of my people and before Israel. Come back with me so I can bow in worship to the Lord your God.”

It’s like the photo op mattered more than the heart. What will people think? Let’s get a good image out there, so that I don’t lose face.

There’s a place where a relationship with the Lord doesn’t really mean a lot to you. That’s never where you really want to be!

Years pass. Another person is introduced in 1 Samuel 16 (David). In chapter 17, while King Saul is paralyzed with fear in front of the Philistines and Goliath, young David is mobilized with confidence in the Lord. David defeats Goliath, the Philistines are devastated by David’s advance.

18:6–15 6As the troops were coming back, when David was returning from killing the Philistine, the women came out from all the cities of Israel to meet King Saul, singing and dancing with tambourines, with shouts of joy, and with three-stringed instruments. 7As they danced, the women sang: Saul has killed his thousands, but David his tens of thousands. 8Saul was furious and resented this song. “They credited tens of thousands to David,” he complained, “but they only credited me with thousands. What more can he have but the kingdom?” 9So Saul watched David jealously from that day forward. 10The next day an evil spirit sent from God came powerfully on Saul, and he began to rave inside the palace. David was playing the lyre as usual, but Saul was holding a spear, 11and he threw it, thinking, “I’ll pin David to the wall.” But David got away from him twice. 12Saul was afraid of David, because the Lord was with David but had left Saul. 13Therefore, Saul sent David away from him and made him commander over a thousand men. David led the troops 14and continued to be successful in all his activities because the Lord was with him. 15When Saul observed that David was very successful, he dreaded him.

Insecurity is unfolding: Uncontrollable anger, jealousy, unchecked suspicion, irrational thoughts, physically harmful intent and abusive actions, deep fear, dread

That marks the rest of his life. His sad life. The sad life that you don’t want. The life of insecurity. What do people think of me? Why don’t they like me? Am I going to lose everything I’ve got? Do I not measure up? What do I have to do or keep doing to stay on top of this? Who’s the enemy or threat standing between me? How can I control them. What will I have to do?

For Saul this bleeds over into his treatment of family. He schemes and thinks if David’s in the family, there’s more control over him, so he arranges a marriage between David and his daughter Michal, as a trap. It doesn’t resolve anything. Insecurity never does.

18:28–29 28Saul realized that the Lord was with David and that his daughter Michal loved him, 29and he became even more afraid of David. As a result, Saul was David’s enemy from then on.

You’ve met people this consumed, this controlled, this bitter (even if it’s never this violent) and it just doesn’t stop.

19:1 – Saul ordered his son Jonathan and all his servants to kill David. But Saul’s son Jonathan liked David very much,

I know no one is perfect, but Jonathan seems like he has one of the most pure hearts in Scripture. He lobbies for David, tries to protect him, and really tries to protect his dad from the rage.

20:30-33 30Then Saul became angry with Jonathan and shouted, “You son of a perverse and rebellious woman! Don’t I know that you are siding with Jesse’s son to your own shame and to the disgrace of your mother? 31Every day Jesse’s son lives on earth you and your kingship are not secure. Now send for him and bring him to me—he must die!” 32Jonathan answered his father back, “Why is he to be killed? What has he done?” 33Then Saul threw his spear at Jonathan to kill him, so he knew that his father was determined to kill David.

“Jonathan, I am just doing all this for you, don’t you see (he can’t even name David). You need to be secure. You need to be powerful.” But, when that really is exposed, Jonathan is in the line of fire. You don’t want that. You don’t want everyone in your life seeing all of your insecurities exposed, because you can’t deal with them.

The hunt/pursuit becomes all-consuming for Saul. He’s rarely focused on being king, and he’s just on one long unsuccessful manhunt where more often than not, David has opportunity to kill Saul and doesn’t.

22:6–8 6Saul heard that David and his men had been discovered. At that time Saul was in Gibeah, sitting under the tamarisk tree at the high place. His spear was in his hand, and all his servants were standing around him. 7Saul said to his servants, “Listen, men of Benjamin: Is Jesse’s son going to give all of you fields and vineyards? Do you think he’ll make all of you commanders of thousands and commanders of hundreds? 8That’s why all of you have conspired against me! Nobody tells me when my own son makes a covenant with Jesse’s son. None of you cares about me or tells me that my son has stirred up my own servant to wait in ambush for me, as is the case today.”

What a whiner! Do you hear the irrationality? Do you hear the victim complex? All the complaints. Who is really chasing who? Stirring stuff up. Justifying things in his head. So few people buy it. He drones on.

Toward the end of 1 Samuel, an epic battle scene is forming. Another round of the Philistines approach Israel. The large Philistine army is coming together. Saul is terrified, and consults a witch, which is serious because he had outlawed all of that. So, he’s a hypocrite. The day of battle comes. And in a moment, it all ends.

31:2–4 2The Philistines pursued Saul and his sons and killed his sons, Jonathan, Abinadab, and Malchishua. 3When the battle intensified against Saul, the archers found him and severely wounded him. 4Then Saul said to his armor-bearer, “Draw your sword and run me through with it, or these uncircumcised men will come and run me through and torture me!” But his armor-bearer would not do it because he was terrified. Then Saul took his sword and fell on it.

That’s the ending of the sad life of Saul. His choices will live on, his children will live in that shadow, and the story of the people of God moves on. David becomes the next king. Saul’s legacy of insecurity is cemented.

We could say a lot more about Saul, but what about US!

We see snapshots of Saul, the very insecure man. Your insecurities likely aren’t going to play out on a global stage, they won’t involve consulting witches or spear-throwing or arranged marriages.

But could there be jealousy, fear, self-pity, lifelong pursuit of being noticed, liked, loved.

This is where a scalpel is needed for our soul (not a sledgehammer), if we’re going to get help, a reset, see some of this. It’s so important.

Often different things trigger our insecurities, and they can change over time for sure. Listen with your heart. When we ask…

Do I have what I need?  Or what is actually a want but I can cast it as a need. And when I don’t get it, where’s my headspace.

Do I measure up? Do others recognize and validate me?  Image, appearance, achievements, key relationships

For years, you grow up in situations where it was communicated that you DIDN’T measure up. That leaves grooves in your soul. (Don’t get me wrong) we all have agency, but some things really influence us and can make life harder

Maybe you’ve become consumed by “I don’t want to be ____.” Do you see yourself here? Any insecurities

Am I doing right or doing something wrong? Or have I done something right/wrong? What do I do about it? Endless sea of doubts, concerns and questions, conscience continues to be alarming

Am I safe?  Could I be hurt, harmed? Am I going to be okay?

Not just mind games, health or loss really change you, change your life.

Am I loved? Especially by a specific person or subset of people.

And if those are the triggers, what are the RESPONSES? What do we do when our insecurities are triggered. We want to turn a corner, or if we’re new in a place, or if we’re trying to offset a sense of insecurity, I’ve noticed that insecurities can present themselves in different ways

loudmouth braggart, own the conversation, the expert, bigger/better, always the center of attention

Dominant Bully – control, push people down; often this is a cover that we can see right through. Is that the way your insecurity presents?

Passive Resignation – I can’t do anything right, I just mess-up everything, I am so stupid. Comes across as humble, but there’s more. Is that the way your insecurity presents?

Somewhere in between, quiet hamster wheel, keep my head down, maybe one day, it will change. if you do enough work on yourself, maybe you can get lucky.

or are you the manipulative schemer that will undermine, play nice, gaslight, play the perpetual victim, flatter, whatever has to be done

Here is something unnerving, maybe even scary. The actions you take because of your insecurity could lead to you getting what you think you want/need.

you could get more money (it still won’t be enough).

land the job, make the sales goal, kid could be an all-star, have the relationship, authentic to your true self

be a dad or grandma, top of your class, promotion, work done on your appearance, still not be enough; be one of the cool kids, eat healthy, eliminate toxic things

Is some of this landing? Is the portrait of Saul you? Do you sense God is speaking? I‘m not trying to be overly dramatic, but this may be a lifeline to you. Stuff like this builds over decades and becomes defining: who you are, who you’re known to be. The patterns become so entrenched. The Lord may be giving you a real opportunity to be honest with yourself.

Saul, US, and now HELP.

If you’re going to work through your insecurities. You’re going to need help. And help is available. I don’t mean to imply that all your insecurities can be dealt with by 5pm tonight. Not the way that works

Long conversations with people who know you well

Counseling with godly women and men who can help steer your soul with God’s Word

Some painful exposure, shattered dreams, walking through the valley of the shadow of death

And God will peel away things. I am not saying it will be easy, but I do think it’s worth it to wrestle these insecurities to the ground.

If you were in my office, or if we were having lunch, we would have a longer discussion, and we could get into specifics. It feels like it’s not enough to just speak in generalities but can I just point you in the direction of what I’ve found helpful in wrestling with my own insecurities.

I want to point you in the direction of a CROSS-SHAPED IDENTITY (or empty-tomb, or manger, or ascension-shaped)

It’s ironic that one writer who has been the most helpful was originally named Saul, and then renamed Paul. He helps us so much here.  I could take you to Gal 2:20, or Philippians 3:4-14, or 1 Corinthians 15:9-10

Galatians 2:20 – Christ lives in me, who loved me and gave himself for me.

Philippians 3:4–14 – Everything that was a gain to me, I have considered to be a loss because of Christ. I also consider everything to be a loss in view of the surpassing value of knowing Christ Jesus my Lord. I [want to] gain Christ and be found in him… I have been taken hold of by Christ Jesus.

1 Corinthians 15:9–10 For I am the least of the apostles, not worthy to be called an apostle, because I persecuted the church of God. But by the grace of God I am what I am, and his grace toward me was not in vain. On the contrary, I worked harder than any of them, yet not I, but the grace of God that was with me.

That begins to take root

Loved by the Father, united with Jesus, indwelled by the Spirit.  If that’s at the center (what’s on the periphery matters, but it isn’t defining), that’s the anchor (you can’t drift far, because that’s holding you)

Know that in your soul. Is this theoretical, or really tangible. Pray that comes alive, and the love of God just washes over you.

Safe, loved, known, complete, welcomed, righteous, clean, holy – not manufactured, but a gift, that won’t be taken away, and actually can’t be taken away,

On one hand, your identity is all about HIM not really about you, but on the other hand it is very much about you, because He knows YOUR name, the number of hairs on YOUR head, the number of days YOU have on this planet, and the good works he will do through YOU. That shapes you, and begins to deal with insecurity.

I would start there, but we have gospel amnesia. We have to constantly remind ourselves of our identity. We can know it, but the voices in our head/heart could be moving us in a different direction emotionally, mentally

Point you in the direction of BIBLE-ROOTED SELF-TALK

This is the age of lots of self-talk. I think some of that is good. It is helpful to have something to come back to again and again. At the same time, so much self-talk seems so empty and puts pressure back on you. No wonder you continue to feel insecure.

I am enough exactly as I am. I am worthy of every dream, wish, and desire I have. I will easily navigate any challenges or surprises today. I take the initiative to create my life the way I want it. If it’s in my heart to do it, I am meant to do it.

I understand how some of those can provide some help. and yet (1) what if some of that is the path to narcissism, (2) what if you try those and they don’t really work, and (3) what if you face something bigger than you

We need better self-talk. It’s ironic to me that the one that insecure Saul constantly chased is the one who gives us helpful self-talk. I’ve read the Psalms of David many times, I felt like I was hearing from confident David. I’ve read them through a different lens this week. I’ve wondered if David had such a vivid display of insecurity, that he constantly reminded himself of how MUCH he needed God, how much he had to depend. Maybe he was correcting his own insecurities, even as he wrote confident songs about God

Ps 18:2 – The Lord is my rock, my fortress…my rock where I seek refuge, my shield…my stronghold.

27:1 – The Lord is my light and my salvation— whom should I fear? The Lord is the stronghold of my life— whom should I dread?

46:1 God is our refuge/strength, a helper always found in times of trouble.

Ps 62:6–7 He alone is my rock and my salvation, I will not be shaken.

Lots of helpful, Bible-rooted self-talk. These words could change your life.

As I was putting this together, I had stopped there, and then there was a real aha moment, that’s not all there is. We live in this culture, and can adopt such an individualistic mindset: me and Jesus, talking to myself.

Point you in one more direction: SPIRIT-FILLED COMMUNITY

You being isolated from other believers is never a winning formula for your insecurities.

But, your friends, your brothers/sisters speaking words of love, joy, peace, patience, gentleness to you. You speaking words of truth, hope, life to them. This is the work of the Spirit.  He moves us to be one-another Jesus-followers. Over time, our insecurities are peeled away because in flesh and blood, we become known, loved and prayed for. And our lives are given to knowing, loving and praying for others.

When you see the church that Jesus is building at its best, it is full of all kinds of people who can rest in Him, and not feel the constant pressure to prove themselves.

I wonder if that’s a reason we have communion. We will pass the plates as insecure people, needing the security of Jesus.

As we gather around the body broken for us, blood shed for us, our identity is shaped. Through receiving the gifts, we are reminding ourselves of His grace for us. We are proclaiming his death. And we are coming together as the community of grace and the community of Jesus.

<><><><><>

6.28.2026    Brainerd Baptist Church