COMPLETE IN CHRISTA GREAT BIG PRAYERCOLOSSIANS 1:9-14

INTRO: The Apostle Paul in the New Testament seems like he has a Type-A personality. And he is on the move. He travels to so many places. He’s a bold witness, with scars and successes. He personally influenced many for the cause of Jesus. Now he’s much older in life, and he’s in prison in Rome for his conviction that Jesus is Lord and others must know. There aren’t good prospects that his future would change.

He had been a man on the move. Now he’s stuck. What could he possibly do in prison? What contribution could he possibly make, and would the contribution he makes there be anywhere close to the impact of preaching in Corinth, or teaching in Ephesus or debating in Athens, or solidifying doctrine in the church at Jerusalem.

How did he spend his time in Rome? He prayed for people and he wrote letters. To the Ephesians, Philippians and to the Colossian believers. We have one of his prayers in Colossians 1, and it’s actually a big run-on sentence. And there’s so much He can teach us. Let’s read it.

READ Colossians 1:9-14

As we listen to Paul pray, we can learn “lessons.” Let’s start with

The “What” Lesson: What Paul prays for can shape what we pray for

Nobody is interested in being the “prayer police.” I want to be careful, but I also think it would be wise for us to pay attention to what Paul prays for, because it could have an effect on WHAT we pray for, and even how we practice our faith. So, let’s learn…

The main REQUEST of this prayer is that believers would have knowledge of God’s will. Do you pray like this?

We are asking that you may be filled with the knowledge of his will in all wisdom and spiritual understanding,

He knows already that they know Jesus Christ, they’ve accepted what he did on the cross and through the resurrection. Accepted and believed it in a way that’s changed them. So, WHAT Paul has in mind for them is beautiful.

Father, flood these Christians (through your Spirit, through what you’ve taught them, what they’ve learned, what they’re learning, reading, meditating on, singing memorizing), flood them with knowledge of YOUR will (purposes, desires, plan, intentions). Fill them in such a way where there they have all kinds of wisdom and spiritual understanding, where they know how to apply it. Give them a supernaturally oriented way of using the understanding for your purposes. WOW!

This is a different thought pattern than a lot of our focus on God’s will (major life events, where we’re trying to sort through good, better, best options for ourselves). What are God’s purposes?

And we actually have a lot of knowledge. We live in an information age, but this is talking not just a flood of data, computers can give you this.

But to fill all the gaps and holes of knowledge of God’s will, purposes, plan (accompanied w/ corresponding wisdom and insight), that comes through your Spirit!

That’s the request. I am not meaning to pile on guilt, but has it been a while since that WHAT matched your WHAT?

And what’s the bigger GOAL of the request, the bigger picture?  The filling that God provides and pours out, means you end up with a

WORTHY WALK = A pattern of life that fits/matches who God is

how you walk (do life) looks like someone who is God’s, it matches what you has been given, it reflects something about who he is

(FULLY) PLEASING = the goal is relational, not just activity based

Do you sense that God might be super hard to please? We need to talk about that.

He made you [the gender, aging, body type, physical characteristics, strengths, capacities, deficiencies]. What does that mean for His care?

He takes pleasure in you because of Jesus’ work for you.

He is pleased by what you will be. He is pleased by the steps you’re taking now on the road to who you will be

Sometimes, we have a hard time picturing what fully pleasing the Lord might look like. We at times project on him a harshness. To appreciate what sensing that pleasure could look like, if we took a few pictures and went with our best scenarios (highly relational)

Teacher – pleasure when a student succeedsBoss – pleasure when an employee is killing it, grows, developsCoach – watches their athlete accomplishes their bestParent – things click, nothing like the smile of a mom/dad

Paul is praying for a filling of knowledge that results in a worthy life and great pleasure to Jesus. Almost hear a few questions – Can you give a few tangible ways that shows up? What will the EFFECT be when the filling lands “on the ground”? That’s part of the WHAT as well!

Notice that God is working, and we’re not necessarily passive

When you BEAR FRUIT (10b) = reproduce good works (where others benefit)

All kinds of activities (Eph 2:10; this is your destiny, living beyond yourself) that match his character, his priorities

that really pleases the Lord BECAUSE the goodness of God spreads, and others are blessed and loved; The Lord smiles!

When you are GROWING IN KNOWLEDGE of God – getting to know Him better and better (NLT)

Knowing him is transformational (closer, deeper, changed to be like him, like Philippians 3 talks about). Your value system is reset

That growth matches the expectations, you were given this gift of a relationship, and you’re responding with a desire for it to go deeper

That really pleases the Lord BECAUSE you’re getting to know him better; the better you know him, the better off you are

When you RECEIVE the Lord’s STRENGTH and endure/patient

11being strengthened with all power, according to his glorious might, so that you may have great endurance and patience,

In the NT, strength is really something you receive from the Lord. It’s not self-generated. You and I are dependent, be strong (in the Lord), I can do everything through Christ who infuses me with strength

Strength is continuously available (account doesn’t dry up)

And this passage puts it in terms where we are “strengthened by God with the greatest strength imaginable” (Moo)

We’re strong and it results, surprise, surprise, not in being a miracle worker, fireworks, 10x performance, mystical magnetism, but rather just endurance/patience.

“[Endurance] is what faith, hope and love bring to an apparently impossible situation, [patience] what they show to an apparently impossible person.”

Not to make anything trivial, but that strength meets you when you’re walking out of work one day scared about the future, or when yet another relationship hasn’t worked out, when the prognosis or diagnosis is unfavorable, when you are still waiting, when the bad news was actually worse than you anticipated, when you had a sleepless night because of small kids or big kids (or even parents!)

All his strength is leveraged for your endurance. You don’t quit. He renews your strength, and you mount up with wings like eagles

All of his strength leveraged for your patience in those moments – you don’t run out of gas, you walk and you don’t faint

That fits, that’s exactly how we should do life: “she kept walking with endurance,” “he kept treating people with patience”; that really pleases the Lord, BECAUSE you never were meant to handle life in your own strength

One last effect – When you GIVE THANKS for all he has done for you

12giving thanks to the Father, who has enabled you to share in the saints’ inheritance in the light.

I am generally not thankful for something I feel like I have earned or contributed to. (So I don’t say “thank you for letting me have these groceries. I paid for them.”)

How different when someone overwhelms you with something you didn’t expect, you know you didn’t earn, you know you didn’t deserve. Christians are saved by and live in grace. We are the ones flooded with gratitude because of the kindness of the Lord

A friend going through cancer – kindness that the Lord had shown him

It really fits, it’s a worthy response, when we take our rightful position as a recipient of grace, not as one who earned everything we got

So, we needed the WHAT lesson! What Paul prays for can shape what we pray for. We don’t always pray for what Paul prays for, but there’s no big reason why we couldn’t. What will you take away from that lesson.

Then’ there’s the “WHERE” Lesson - Where Paul lands with this prayer is where we should land – deep gratitude to God

As much as the requests matter, it’s significant to me that we’re back at God, and his Son Jesus. Being thankful prompts some amazing words about the character and actions of God.

Paul lands at a spot where he is grateful for what God has done.

12giving thanks to the Father, who has enabled you to share in the saints’ inheritance in the light.

There are words like QUALIFIED/ENABLEMENT. God directed a STATUS CHANGE. God has enabled you – made you fit, qualified, competent, sufficient, all obligations have been met, nothing else left to do

You receive a privilege of inheritance because God has caused you to be the kind of person who can share in this.

Also, God has accomplished a RESCUE with a TRANSFER.

13He has rescued us from the domain of darkness and transferred us into the kingdom of the Son he loves.

So, you have been delivered out of something, and you have been brought into a new realm, as new residents of a very different kingdom. Status change, and a realm transfer.

Rescued from the domain of darkness. Without Jesus, we are captives held prisoner by a spiritual “power structure that is characterized by the forces of chaos, evil, and judgment” (Moo). It’s a mess that unless someone intervenes is destructive and hopeless.

We don’t even have the capacity to hatch our own escape plan. So, God takes the initiative. How much must he love you, to act that way on your behalf. To do what was necessary for your rescue from this awful domain.

Plus he has transferred safely to a new kingdom. That action of God is a continuous experience. We’re united to Him, and so we live, breathe, walk, do life in a new kingdom. The kingdom of his beloved Son.

We’re united to King JESUS! This is not just speaking of the kingdom of God, but here it’s the beloved Son! Father loves the Son, now you’re brought into that kingdom of deep love.

How personal these kinds of words must’ve been to Paul. He walked in darkness, and one day was physically blinded, hears the voice of Jesus, his eyes are “opened,” life will never be the same.

We’re grateful for what God did, and we’re also grateful for what we have

We have redemption – the spiritual slavery problem we had is firmly in the past. Our present reality is freedom.

We have forgiveness. Our sin problem is in the past. Language in Scripture is that sin has been wiped away, thrown away, not in his mind, turned his back “on them”  [not on you, but your sins]. The present reality is forgiveness! What Jesus has done takes care of sin

This is where Paul lands his prayers. Worship, praise, far beyond requests or something like a vending machine.

CONCLUSION: For me, there are a few passages that are like this, that in a few words, immediately point me to worship Jesus. Reading what I do here makes me so grateful, so in awe, I don’t know exactly what to do, say, or think.

You get so far and it’s easy to forget…wait a minute this whole passage started as a heads-up about how Paul was praying for them

There is another lesson. We probably could’ve started with

The HOW lesson – How Paul invests in the lives of Colossians is how we can invest in God’s work.

He invests by praying for them, and even communicating to them that he’s praying for them. What a lesson for us. I was talking with a friend about how prayers could make a difference in the spiritual well-being of others. Surely we underestimate what difference this makes in the bigger picture.

What a gift you could give to people! You could be there for them, even when you can’t be there physically, but before God, in your prayers for them. God could use your prayers in big ways.

Surely, you could pray for day-to-day concerns and big decisions, medical needs, job, future plans.

But now you know some of the “WHAT” else you could pray for: some of the deep work God does in the lives of people.

And you also have an idea that prayer lands you in the right “WHERE,” the right place. Prayer for others could be the gateway into deeper worship of the Lord, deep gratitude for all that He’s given.

I am the recipient of prayers like that from friends. I am not sure there is anything more humbling.

Father, this morning I pray you provide Curtis with the “wisdom” he needs to shepherd and lead his church and family life. May the choices and decisions he needs to make be based fully in your ways.

Increase wisdom in his life when he might be faced with difficult or challenging times . Give him the ongoing ability to see through your eyes when faced with issues that are not so black/white in answers.

Surround him with others that he can draw strength from to fulfill your call on his life each day.  Whether it be family, friends, always help him to “walk with the wise”.

Bless my Pastor today - walk with him and teach him more of You!

“ Walk with the Wise and become Wise”….Psalm 13:20

In His Joy

On one side of this, I think, “who am I to receive that kind of grace from a brother in Jesus.”

On the other hand, I have come to expect that the Lord is all about showing me mercy, kindness, grace, sustaining, helping, and often he does that through others, through YOU! And I just have to land back where Paul lands. Grateful for how God has put it all together. Grateful for what I’ve received because of who He is and what He’s done.

<><><><><>

3.22.2026    Brainerd Baptist Church