COMPLETE IN CHRISTCORE DRIVESCOLOSSIANS 1:24-2:3

INTRO: With most people, I think if you peeled lots of layers back, you would find a few core drives deeply influence and steer a lot of your life. A few things affect what’s important to you, what you spend money on, say yes or no to, talk about, how you organize your life. Some driving priorities.

Today, we’re talking about core drives, and we’re going to look at a few verses where the author (Paul) is very autobiographical. Our series [series slide] is through the book of Colossians.

READ TEXT of Colossians 1:24-2:3

Paul assesses where He is. He’s in a good frame of mind (even in prison)

He understands that part of what it means to follow Jesus is a set of sufferings (he’s filling up his, and he’s doing it for the church) – 24

With that you hear what he wants to see happen.

The first core drive is to make the “word of God FULLY KNOWN” (v 25)

Paul is commissioned to take God’s word to people. God gave him that assignment and it clearly steers his life. And I want that to steer our church and our lives as well.

It would be easy to miss what he’s talking about with making the word of God fully known, because he also talks about mysteries being revealed, and he talks about proclaiming Jesus. So, what does it mean to make God’s Word fully known.

God’s Word is a fully-revealed-over-time message.

It once was a mystery/secret/riddle (26) = something that wasn’t known, we didn’t have access to the info.

But God determined that this mystery would be revealed (26). What he was doing was something that was hidden for ages and generations (26) So, he worked through time, and over time.

Now it’s revealed; and access is available, at least that’s a driver. Make access available to everyone (Gentiles) – (27). That’s the present. None of this is an accident that God’s trying to manage.

One day this is all headed to glory. We have hope that God will fulfill every promise, there will be new creation, new heavens and a new earth.

Making God’s word fully known means bringing people into the story, so they can understand and appreciate what God is doing.

All that is true, but naturally you sense there’s something else that should be included. It is a message that gets revealed over time, but specifically it’s about a person

It is the message of CHRIST (in you) the hope of glory (27) all about Jesus

Making the word of God fully known means people get brought into knowledge of Jesus. He’s the mystery who was revealed. This man named Jesus was God’s Son and our Messiah. Everything is hidden in him. We proclaim HIM/Jesus (28)

Who he is – a couple of weeks ago – identity (center of everything), life, role in accomplishing redemption, sacrificial and victorious death, resurrection that defeats all enemies, ascension, eventual return

We have an “all-about-Jesus” message. We have more than just a body of knowledge, an institution to belong to, or a set of practices/rituals. Life is wrapped up in a person

Making the word of God fully known also means making sure people realize it’s a “for-you” message (The word is FOR PEOPLE)

revealed…to people/saints (26).  You have been let in on the secret. You get the details of the mystery

The mystery is being made known among the Gentiles, people (27) The gospel draws people from different ethnicities, rationalities, and gives opportunities to turn from everything else, and trust in Him, opportunities to respond in faith and obedience. He is the king and he loves people

It’s Christ…IN YOU the hope of glory (27). Christ taking up residence in your life. God’s glory is pictured in Revelation as living with people.

Paul sits in prison, and what consumes him is the word of God being fully known. What can he do to make that happen. Because when that happens it changes people.

Colossians 2:2-3 (all the riches/treasures)

You have complete understanding – assurance, so you’re not wobbly, constantly wondering whether things are okay between them and God. You begin to have more and more wisdom and understanding so that you can do life.  Relationship grows and goes deeper, you get closer.

Instead of playing spiritual pinball, instead of being in darkness with tons of gaps, you have a few anchor points.

So, bring that into the world we live in.

The messes we make and try to clean up, the challenges we inherit (and didn’t ask for)

World of birthday parties, pizza, headlines, videos, doctor’s appointments and homework, lawsuits, grocery shopping, Spotify, sunsets, and traffic

Make the Word of God fully known there, and it changes things. You can appreciate why that would drive Paul so much, and I want it to drive us.

Paul is driven by something else

The second core drive of Paul: present everyone mature in Christ

I want to be driven in the same way, and I want this burden to land on our church. What if all of us cared about all of us in that same way? We want to see everyone who comes to Brainerd presented mature in Christ.

If you pay attention closely, you realize that Paul is thinking about others not himself, even though he’s in prison. And he’s thinking of people he hasn’t met yet, and likely never will. And he wants something for them.

It’s like fast forward from now to the end. And imagine that in that time you experience growth, by God’s grace you change, and you become whole, complete, grown-up, mature. Paul wants that.

One day we stand before God, and Paul can’t rest until he does his part in helping everyone be ready for that day.

What are the kinds of things that help us be ready for that day? Look at v28

28We proclaim him, warning and teaching everyone with all wisdom, so that we may present everyone mature in Christ.

Paul is doing his part, and it really helps me see roles we all can play.

When the church becomes a culture of PROCLAIMERS. People who carry out the work of God to make Jesus known, announcers, they tell everyone about Christ (quiet ways

For some of you, that was a pastor, doing what I am doing. For so many more it was a parent, a VBS teacher or youth group leader, campus ministry worker, friend, family member

Someone did that for you, you could do that for someone. We need those people, if there are going to be people who are presented mature.

What if the church became a culture of sensitive WARNING – something could get off-track, a situation is dangerous. Someone has taken first steps down a darker path.  Who can speak up to help, (riches that should define you, maturity that’s your goal)?

This is quiet work, but really good work, and some of you do it really well and helpfully. We need warn-ers.

What if our culture grew in TEACHERS. Here is what the right behavior, understanding looks like; one person passes it down.

That teaching can happen at podiums, slides but also over lunch/dinner, conversations, texts, smaller groups.

If we’re going to stand mature before the Lord being presented mature in Christ, God uses people who do the warning and teaching WITH ALL WISDOM – what’s better, how do you navigate things; you begin to utilize your life experience for the benefit of others.

Our culture would need people who can see good that God has for other people, and hold that out for a goal (like Paul is doing). God uses people who have spiritual goals for us

A core drive of Paul is to help people be all that God intended. All the teaching/warning – here’s what I want for you: reaching maturity, being a grown-up Christian

That’s part of what it means to be a pastor. But in another sense, that’s all of our job descriptions. What if we became a church where we wanted to see God do deep work in each other’s lives. What if we cared that much.

What if God created a culture where a number of people really sense this level of spiritual responsibility that leads them to persistent work.

Paul suffers (24), he labors and strives (29), he’s struggling (1). He’s not exaggerating. Our Christian walk is a race, a fight. We need others going to bat for us, helping us hang in there.

People like this put time in, ask questions, pursue people, how are they doing, what do they need, can I help.

That would be an amazing culture! That’s a culture working together.

Not a group of independent contractors

More than just a relationship with Jesus. Actually, your walk with Jesus is also meant to be a set of relationships; first and foremost with Jesus, but the rest of the body of Jesus, those relationships are organized into a church family committed together (brother, sister, family), joined together

You need this. your Christian life isn’t meant to be isolated, disconnected from other Christians. That’s just not how we’re intended to live.

Of course, we all answer for our own choices and responses. We are all individually accountable!

More and more I am just convinced that God has intended that other people become deeply invested in how you stand before God.

As this happens, there’s quite the picture.

2I want their hearts to be encouraged and joined together in love, so that they may have all the riches of complete understanding and have the knowledge of God’s mystery—Christ.

We’re really in this together. Church ≠ God and hundreds of millions of people with their own separate thing going on, disconnected from each other, but meeting in the same space. God has something far better than that.

The relationship language is incredible. I think of relationships like spouse, coworker (30 years), sibling, friendship. Imagine all the benefits of a relational thickness with Jesus. I think that’s part of what it means to be presented as mature IN CHRIST!

_____

We can do some reflection: if I could speak to visitors, guests, even fairly regular attenders, I might ask: is that what you’re looking for in a church?

I am guessing for many of you that’s it. You’ve come to the point where church means more than a service where you land when it’s convenient, a group of programs, a handful of people you recognize. You know you need more

If I were speaking to members: Could you help build this here at Brainerd? Could you continue building this at Brainerd? We need you.

Presenting everyone mature seems pretty daunting to me. Especially because I know there are so many needs, so many complexities, so many hard seasons and it’s really a fight to walk well with Jesus.

But, I also am really optimistic. Because I sense the level of spiritual care for each other rising. I sense with many of you that’s a growing priority. You’re investing the hours, the time, the emotional energy, the spiritual energy. God is raising up people who strive, labor, struggle for the spiritual well-being of others.

Others are asking: How can I be that? How can I help build that? Everyone is going to find their own way of doing it

END WITH QUESTIONS

Are we a church that is driven by the word being fully made known and people being presented as mature in Christ? Are those are drives?

How does that show up?What is one step we could take?

Are you a Christian that prioritizes other Christians being presented as mature in Christ? What role do you play in that?

How does that show up?What is one step you could take?

<><><><><>

4.12.2026    Brainerd Baptist Church