GOD’S WORK | OUR WORKEMBRACING OUR WORKNEHEMIAH 3 and ROMANS 16

INTRO: Lately, I have been praying for Brainerd something we call our big prayer: that through the Spirit’s work at our church, more and more people would experience and enjoy all the grace that God has for them in Jesus.

I have been taking a few weeks to share my heart, unpack how that burden, how that direction could take shape at our church. I don’t have 15 initiatives, 5 new programs, but I sense the Lord has some new places he wants to take Brainerd Baptist, and I want to be sensitive to go where He is leading. Collectively, I think you do as well.

Part of what this big prayer means (I shared last week), we can’t/won’t enjoy all the grace God has for us until we grow close(r). But what if this became a community where people can be known, loved, and prayed for? This takes a while sometimes, but I am praying that it would get harder and harder for people to remain anonymous for very long. That was a burden I shared last week. But, here’s the reality.

People being known, loved, prayed for really takes work. It takes people…Embracing the Work. it means people really choose to take initiative, right? Or it just never happens

For all of us to be on the same page, it’s helpful to have a description of WORK – Work is effort or activity directed toward producing or accomplishing something.

For a few minutes, I want you to see some different kinds of work in the Bible done by God’s people.

Let’s start in the book of Nehemiah. Nehemiah is in the OT. Setting is Jerusalem which has been a mess. Basically it had been torn apart, and essentially emptied out 100+ years earlier by the Babylonian empire, which meant the ruins had to be eerie.

But long story short, empires change, policies change, and people of Israel begin to move back to Jerusalem. It’s a massive rebuilding effort, and Nehemiah is led by God and commissioned by the king to play a lead role in doing something.

After analyzing the situation, taking it all in Nehemiah speaks…

17So I said to them, “You see the trouble we are in. Jerusalem lies in ruins and its gates have been burned. Come, let’s rebuild Jerusalem’s wall, so that we will no longer be a disgrace.” 18I told them how the gracious hand of my God had been on me, and what the king had said to me. They said, “Let’s start rebuilding,” and their hands were strengthened to do this good work.

This will be a work for God. It’s more than just a building project. It’s something for God’s glory. Chapter 3 is a very special chapter in the Bible. I don’t know if there’s a more meticulous chapter than this description of the construction crew.

3:1-14

Nehemiah 4:6b – the people had the will to keep working.

Admittedly, I am a Bible nerd (helps with my job), so I love this stuff. You might not be able to pronounce every one of the names, but I think you can see some things shining through.

I love the different groups of people who were a part of this – priests, temple servants, blacksmiths, rulers, daughters, perfumers

I love even the tasks that seem small (a portion of the wall), and are definitely less than glamorous – dung gate

This is the way God’s work goes down. Lots of people, lots of tasks, God’s people doing good work. Keep that in your mind.

Can we read about another kind of work? What work do you see in the New Testament by God’s people, after Jesus dies, rises and ascends? That might have more resonance, because we live after Jesus died as well.

You don’t see them building the walls or exterior of FBC-Jerusalem or fixing the dung gate at Rome Community Church. But you do still see God’s people at work.

You remember what we read in Nehemiah (names, jobs, activities). When you go to Romans 16, you see something really similar in some ways. Only this time it is taking place in a gathering of believers in Jesus.

1I commend to you our sister Phoebe, who is a servant of the church in Cenchreae. 2So you should welcome her in the Lord in a manner worthy of the saints and assist her in whatever matter she may require your help. For indeed she has been a benefactor of many—and of me also. 3Give my greetings to Prisca and Aquila, my coworkers in Christ Jesus, 4who risked their own necks for my life. 5Greet also the church that meets in their home. Greet my dear friend Epaenetus, who is the first convert to Christ from Asia. 6Greet Mary, who has worked very hard for you.

9Greet Urbanus, our coworker in Christ, and my dear friend Stachys.

12Greet Tryphaena and Tryphosa, who have worked hard in the Lord. Greet my dear friend Persis, who has worked very hard in the Lord.

Common language in the New Testament is “workers, worked hard, coworkers.” A wide variety of people, men/women, Jewish people, Greek background.

But you do begin to notice a theme. They do their work, but the work is described as being “in Jesus Christ,” or “in the Lord.”

That’s significant. Jesus Christ is our life, our all in all, so any work done is work done for him, through him, in him.

Working in the Lord. What does that mean? It doesn’t stem from working hard to get on God’s good side

Ephesians 2:8–10 8For you are saved by grace through faith, and this is not from yourselves; it is God’s gift— 9not from works, so that no one can boast. 10For we are his workmanship, created in Christ Jesus for good works, which God prepared ahead of time for us to do.

We know we aren’t working for our salvation. But what is working in Christ

This may be one of those really helpful places to slow down and make sure we have a good idea of what’s being said…

If work is effort or activity directed toward producing or accomplishing something, then what does it actually look like on a Monday to work hard in the Lord?

What sort of specific efforts or activities would/could it involve?

Did you come up with something?

If we went back to our description of work and added a couple of things, it might look like this.

Work in the Lord is effort or activity fueled by devotion to Jesus empowered and directed by Jesus toward producing or accomplishing something that Jesus desires.

It’s nothing like doing “volunteer hours” as part of the deal. You sign your kid up for little league and you have to take your turn at the concession stand. We get that. This isn’t that.

This is work for Jesus, and you begin to realize that work for Jesus regularly traces back to people. People, people, people. What Jesus desires is that people would be changed by the work of his cross, that people would be gathered in his name, that people would recognize his call to use their life for his purposes as they invest in other people.

So, even the most behind-the-scenes, administrative, organizational, back-end work that we do in the Lord, contributes to people from every nation, race, ethnicity, language knowing Jesus, worshipping and giving their life and allegiance to Jesus.

So, who are the kinds of people who we could expect to be found working in the Lord? I really think it could mean anyone. I think about all ages: kids, students, senior adults.

What if Brainerd continues to become more and more a church filled with people embracing working in the Lord. Filled with people taking the initiative, recognizing we already have been commissioned to work in the Lord. We’re not waiting on being credentialed. We have been.

So, I am talking to 100% of the believers here! Do you see that? What obstacles prevent you from getting there? We need to work through those, Are there reasons you talk yourself out of this…

drowning in tough stuff, so I don’t have anything to bringso consumed by trivial things or actually pretty important stuffnew to it all, surely you need some sort of tenureFairly self-absorbed (all about me)constantly distracted, so you have good intentions.insecure and you feel worthlesssettled for the Christian life being something far less

What if this wakes you up? What if you find actual meaningful work in the Lord that he designed you to do?

Where would you start? What do you have to offer? I would like to run through several verses, just to get your mind working

Prov 17:17 – A friend loves at all times, and a brother is born for a difficult time.

Ephesians 4:29 – No foul language should come from your mouth, but only what is good for building up someone in need, so that it gives grace to those who hear.

Hebrews 3:13 – But encourage each other daily…

2 Corinthians 1:11 – …join in helping us by your prayers.

Romans 15:7 – Therefore welcome one another, just as Christ also welcomed you, to the glory of God.

Philippians 2:15–16 – …be blameless and pure, children of God who are faultless in a crooked and perverted generation, among whom you shine like stars in the world, by holding firm to the word of life.

Ep 6:4 – Fathers, bring your children up in the training/instruction of the Lord.

Proverbs 1:8 – …my son, don’t reject your mother’s teaching,

Colossians 4:15 – Give my greetings to Nympha and the church in her home.

Hebrews 13:2 – Don’t neglect to show hospitality…

1 Corinthians 16:17–18 – I am delighted to have Stephanas, Fortunatus, and Achaicus present, because…they have refreshed my spirit and yours.

Philippians 2:30 – Epaphroditus came close to death for the work of Christ, risking his life.

Ro 15:20 – My aim is to preach the gospel where Christ has not been named.

Acts 18:26–27 – Priscilla and Aquila they took Apollos aside and explained the way of God to him more accurately.

Luke 8:1–3 – Afterward Jesus was traveling from one town and village to another, preaching and telling the good news of the kingdom of God. The Twelve were with him, and also some women who had been healed of evil spirits and sicknesses: Mary, called Magdalene (seven demons had come out of her); 3Joanna the wife of Chuza, Herod’s steward; Susanna; and many others who were supporting them from their possessions.

Romans 12:15 – weep with those who weep.

Galatians 6:1 – Brothers and sisters, if someone is overtaken in any wrongdoing, you who are spiritual, restore such a person with a gentle spirit, watching out for yourselves so that you also won’t be tempted.

Romans 12:8 – [If you have the gift of] leading, [lead] with diligence.

You’re not surprised to hear that I could do this all day.

All of these opportunities to work. If we were to draw a sandbox to put all the kinds of “working in the Lord” we could think of.I don’t want you leaving here uninformed.

Feels pretty personal to you. It really does.

Growing up. Of course I don’t remember everything, but I do know many preschool and nursery workers cared for me. I’ve not met the person who says “I feel especially called to change other people’s kids diapers.” But they did. They worked hard.

I think of some middle school years, and some adults I had in my life. I am not sure anyone has the spiritual gift of dealing with middle school boys’ foolishness. But people worked hard. People wouldn’t quit. They loved me, and I think they saw a dream/desire in a young man, and they worked hard to help me.  Of course this feels personal.

Take you to a different place. The house of my friends Larry and Marion. It’s Easter Sunday lunch after church. We’re at a house - comfortable 10 people there. Imagine 30. Half of those college students away from home. I’ve preached twice already. We’ve never lived in the same area as a relative, so Marion wanted us to spend the holiday with them. My friend, Larry, one of the hosts, says to all 30 of us, hey before we eat, I am going to make you sing for your supper. I laughed nervously. he didn’t. He handed out copies of words to songs about the resurrection. He walked over to the piano in his overcrowded living room. And guess what, we sang. Then we prayed. We ate. We talked.

Some of the college students that were there that day became friends, became co-workers on staff. More than a lunch – He was working. bringing people together, psalms, hymns, spiritual songs

My first time at Brainerd. I met a man 50 years older. He decided that evening to work in the Lord. Welcomer. Connector. Encourager

I am not sure anyone is unusually qualified to have warm, spiritual conversations with complete strangers. That didn’t seem to matter to him, he went for it. I stayed at Brainerd for 8 years, and came back a few years ago to serve here again. One conversation with a man who was working for the Lord, changed the course of my life.

A few questions

Do you have confidence that God has good work specifically for you to do?

What’s the first step (or the next step) you’re going to take?

<><><><><>

2.15.2026    Brainerd Baptist Church