GOD’S WORK | OUR WORKSTEWARDING OUR HERITAGEPSALM 90

INTRO: Over the last several weeks, I wanted to open my heart, to give you a glimpse into burdens I have for our church, to call us to something.

Particularly I’ve had a big prayer: that more (and more) people  would experience and enjoy  all the grace that God has for them  in Jesus.

I wanted to slow down and frame what it could look like for us to grow in our closeness, where we are known, loved and prayed for. I want us to appreciate what it looks like when God uses our work for his purposes. I am burdened for us to see more people trust in Jesus. Today, I am going to try to bring much of that together.

I kept finding myself drawn to PSALM 90. Let’s read it.

So many things we can highlight. First, GOD IS CREATOR (and in charge). That’s the way Moses speaks of him [v2 especially]

But because he’s the refuge, dwelling place, one who brings help, Moses prays to Him (12-17). Whoever God is, He’s absolutely not disconnected from his people. So, Moses reaches out

Another realization is that TIME MOVES SO FAST. Surely you noticed all the time references

1 – Every generation,          2 – eternity to eternity4 – 1000 years, yesterday, few hours of the night9,15 – our day/our years;     10 – 70, 80 years – pass quickly, fly away12 – number our days         14 – all our days

We’re really pressed on this aspect of how fast time moves: You don’t have unlimited quantities, none of us do. Do we appreciate that?

In a world where time moves fast, LIFE CAN BE VERY HARD. Yet another psalm that doesn’t pull punches. Full strength talk about things like:

end of life, being consumed, terrified, sighing, struggling, sorrowing, humbled by God, adversity, questions like ‘how long.’

So many of you aren’t a stranger to any of this. You know it’s hard.

An important connection is how hard life is under the wrath of God

7For we are consumed by your anger; we are terrified by your wrath.9For all our days ebb away under your wrath;11Who understands the power of your anger? Your wrath matches the fear that is due you.

So, all the difficulty we experience is tied to living in a world that is experiencing the wrath of God.

God’s wrath can be a scary subject, and so we proceed carefully. It’s never right to turn the volume down on anything God says. And it’s always wise to make sure we’re connecting the right dots. Yes, God directs his wrath toward my sin, and your sin (verse 8).

8You have set our iniquities before you, our secret sins in the light of your presence.

We sin against God, and that becomes guilt we carry, a problem we cannot solve and a relationship we can’t reconcile on our own. In other words, we need Jesus to take God’s wrath and punishment directed at OUR sin.

ALSO, embedded in a discussion about God’s wrath are the effects of compounded sin which wreaks havoc, and creates a world where things are broken and corrupted.

God looks at a world piled up with rebellion which deserves his wrath. One day, he will set things to rights. He will judge But for now, praise the Lord we also find that he offers compassion. Again, that is why we need Jesus.

How do we live in such a world where God is gracious, and God’s wrath is real? What do we do – we ask for WISDOM (12): Help us navigate it all

Teach us to know what to think, feel, love, value, hold on to. Be patient, because we might be slow learners.

The prayers in Psalm 90 catch a head of steam.

Teach us – (so that) we can develop internal wisdom (where it counts)Turn and have compassion – as we ask HOW LONG

Satisfy us in the morning with your faithful love. Being loved faithfully stabilizes and secures so much inside us. God, YOU are enough, what more could I want, this is the life!   (so that) verbal joyful expressions and an internal disposition of gladness.

Make us rejoice – in proportion to your humbling of us, and in the adversity we experience. We’re not grinding out life on this earth, but we’re appreciating the narrative from his perspective.

Church, I want all of those requests for you!

Everything seems to build to the last two verses which are so powerful.

16Let your work be seen by your servants, and your splendor by their children. 17Let the favor of the Lord our God be on us; establish for us the work of our hands— establish the work of our hands!

We’re numbering our days, so that we don’t miss what God is doing (your work) and who God is (your splendor): we want to see it, we want our kids to see it

We’re numbering our days, so that we don’t miss the work God’s calling US to do. Lord, please establish it, make it count, make it last.

1 Cor 15:58 – you know that your labor in the Lord is not in vain.

What a powerful Psalm!

Personally, this Psalm means the world to me. But, did you notice all the times we read “we/us/our”? This is written to a community of faith.

God does his work through gathering his people over generations, even as time seems to pass by so quickly. His people are committed to his splendor being seen, his kingdom coming, his work being done.

God has created me, but also OUR CHURCH.

God has situated me in time, but he also has situated Brainerd in time, that keeps on moving [1928 – 100 years]

This life for me and for you is hard. But, even as a church this world we live in is really hard. We meet no one who is care free. Hearts are broken, lives are interrupted

Still, God is doing something. And he’s got work for us to do.

Thinking about time in the lives of God’s people, the Lord has impressed on me the idea of heritage. Heritage could be described as what previous generations built, practiced, and handed down.

So, what does it mean to be a steward of all we’ve been given as a church. What does it mean to steward such a good heritage?

I want to speak personally. I first joined the Brainerd family almost 27 years ago. I became a part of God’s good work here.

And a few years back, God was stirring in Shawna and I to rejoin you. It’s still so humbling that God brought us back here to invest what we have.

God’s work at Brainerd isn’t just a ‘talking point’ for me or Shawna. It’s not abstract. God’s work here in my mind involves people.

That’s a gift I received through these and SO MANY MORE here at BBC.

So many are still faithful, and yet so many aren’t here anymore. But still they numbered their days so well, so that we have what we have.

They loved the Lord, they poured into the work God was doing here

They gave us something. We walk in spaces they paid for. We benefit from hard decisions they made. We receive grace because of prayers they prayed. We’re stronger in our faith because of teaching they did.

Fast forward to 2026, we’ve not been given a heritage of a perfect church. There is no such thing. We have some baggage, we’ve had our challenges, there’s lots of room to grow, and He’s still working on us. There are green pastures and still waters God is going to bring us to.

But, we’ve been given a church that has been a faithful witness for Jesus right here. The building blocks are simple. Faithfulness…

To God’s Word – we’ve trusted it’s true and works in powerful waysTo prayer – we’ve realized we’re dependent on the Spirit’s helpTo people – they matter to God, they matter to usOver time – God never gets in a hurry, faithfulness really matters.

That’s what you are a part of.

What do we do now with what previous generations built, practiced and handed to us?

If we’re really not here long, if every single day counts, and if days could easily pass by with us living foolishly, if the world is hard, if people can only be satisfied when they experience the love of God.

Then, it’s not about patting ourselves on the back, making Brainerd a monument or relic.

And it’s not about getting stagnant. Lots of things at Brainerd have changed over time, and the way we do things will change over time

It IS about being faithful AND fruitful with what we’ve been given.

It’s required that stewards be found faithful. Let’s do that.

But in the language of one of Jesus’ parables: I want to take what he’s entrusted to us and see it multiplied and productive.

Here’s some of how I process things:

God has given us a fellowship committed to Him and each other.

The story of Brainerd is people, people, people. God working in people.

Smaller Groups – that’s our heritage and what if the groups went even deeper, welcoming further, growing closer

Kids/Students/Young Adults – foundation of their faith is laid well, step into genuine spiritual responsibility. Men/women deeply invested in and teaching other people’s grandkids. What if we were even more intentional

Dynamic I’ve noticed – a stable core (some of you are a part of this), and also people here for a strategic season (some of you are a part of this)

What if through it all people leave her better than when they came (more assured of the love of Jesus, deeper in their faith, able to navigate the tough world)

SUMMARY – God has given us a fellowship committed to Him and each other. How will we steward that heritage  faithfully and fruitfully?

God has given us a burden to care for our neighbors/community.

The story of Brainerd is one where we’ve consistently looked for ways to show God’s grace to the community

Brainerd Baptist School is independent now, but it was started by our church, and there’s still a deep burden that these walls be filled with kids all week long hearing about Jesus.

God led our church to build the BX (health, wellness, ministry and non-profit meeting space).

People coming here (food, community, support)

Us going to where people are (stepping into difficulty and brokenness, caring for vulnerable kids, people new to our area, addiction recovery)

SUMMARY – What if there’s more? What needs are going to cross our paths in the future. God’s given us a burden to care for our neighbors, community. How will we steward that heritage faithfully and fruitfully?

God has given us property and resources to use for Him.

Many church building sit empty except for 2-3 hours a week. You’re at a place that sees resources differently

They are not for us to hoard, but for us to use, to open up. Most buildings are used 6 days of the week, some are used every single day

Pavillion, green space, playground, soccer field

We have three mission houses paid for by our church

The way Brainerd has approached property/resources is to make a choice to invest beyond what benefits us

We’re going through some campus master planning. The Lord may be bringing us into a season where we can address where the Lord is leading us, and we might build. There’s a mindset I want to learn from.

Our predecessors didn’t build buildings to solve problems, they built to give Brainerd opportunities in the future.

God has given us property and resources to use for Him. How will we steward that heritage faithfully and fruitfully?

God has given us deep capacity to invest in other churches.

Brainerd started because people sensed a need for the gospel in this community. But quickly, you read about the people of Brainerd investing in the launch of Frawley Road, South Seminole.

Since I’ve been back, I’ve gotten to visit. Salt River Community Church (Tempe) and Red Letter Church (Southeast Asia)

International congregations/fellowships: the Cambodians God relocated to our area, or Spanish-speakers, or Arabic-speakers or our friends from Ukraine that settled here.

In the beginning of August, North Georgia Fellowship will launch.

God has given us deep capacity to invest in other churches. How will we steward that heritage faithfully and fruitfully?

God has given us many gospel partners ready to go to the nations.

We’ve had a history of sending out missionaries. An aspect of the story of Brainerd has been recognizing how deep the gospel need is where there are few disciples, and sometimes no churches.

We’ve committed to praying, funding, sending people long-term and supporting the people we’ve sent.

In two weeks we will commission another young couple who have been obedient to the Lord’s leading in their lives and are going to share the gospel.

God has given us many gospel partners ready to go to the nations. How will we steward that heritage faithfully and fruitfully?

CONCLUSION:

Reading of Matthew 25:14–28

PRAYER

<><><><><>

3.8.2026  Brainerd Baptist Church