OT REVISITED GREAT STARTS | UNSUCCESSFUL FINISHES SELECTED SCRIPTURES

There are times when we come to God’s word and

we don’t know exactly what we should do, God’s word directs us or we’re down, and need to be lifted up, something in God’s Word comforts and encourages

But sometimes when we come to God’s Word, we need warnings. I am not always saying we want or enjoy them, but I do know we need them

Our heart gets distracted, our flesh is weak, the pull of the world is strong. So we need an examples, instruction that can serve us well.

The Old Testament [series] consistently functions that way. We’re going to look at moments in the life of a king named Hezekiah. These moments warn us.  Hezekiah is actually the main subject of 11 chapters in the Bible (2 Kings 18-20, 2 Chronicles 29-32, and Isaiah 36-39). We will see (1) how well he lived so much of his life, but we’ll also see (2) a very disappointing finish. And I want that to (3) help increase our spiritual sensitivity; where do I need to be on guard?

2 Chronicles and 2 Kings aren’t known for a million bright spots. Several kings in these books stand out for making poor choice after poor choice. But both of these books speak of a king name Hezekiah who lived well.

2 Chronicles 29:2 – He did what was right in the Lord’s sight just as his ancestor David had done.

2 Chronicles 31:20–21 20Hezekiah… did what was good and upright and true before the Lord his God. 21He was diligent in every deed that he began in the service of God’s temple, in the instruction and the commands, in order to seek his God, and he prospered.

So, as we see Hezekiah’s life, we see how he was DEVOTED TO THE LORD’S AGENDA

If God means anything to you, you want these kinds of things said: He/she did what’s right, good, upright, true. Diligent in deeds, in following instruction, in obeying commands. He/she chose to seek God.

Also notice connection to David. God made many promises to the family of David. So many of David’s family line squanders that heritage. They really don’t care. But, Hezekiah stands out as one who took it seriously.

There’s a whole generation of Israel carved out, and their lives are changed by Hezekiah’s devotion.

2 Kings 18 builds on what Chronicles says, and adds

2 Kings 18:3–7 3He did what was right in the Lord’s sight just as his ancestor David had done. 4He removed the high places, shattered the sacred pillars, and cut down the Asherah poles. He broke into pieces the bronze snake that Moses made, for until then the Israelites were burning incense to it. It was called Nehushtan. 5Hezekiah relied on the Lord God of Israel; not one of the kings of Judah was like him, either before him or after him. 6He remained faithful to the Lord and did not turn from following him but kept the commands the Lord had commanded Moses. 7The Lord was with him, and wherever he went he prospered. He rebelled against the king of Assyria and did not serve him.

The Lord was WITH HIM. That is a powerful statement in the Bible Hezekiah was USED BY GOD IN SIGNIFICANT WAYS

All you have to do is read Kings and Chronicles, or even Judges, other prophets, and you know that this kind of activity of eliminating false worship was really rare. It was uncommon to take this kind of a stand.

Hezekiah shines pretty brightly in an awful storyline. You watch families and nations blow up because they don’t care about the Lord.

Hezekiah removes, shatters, cuts down, breaks into pieces, rebels against foreign kings. Aggressive action against anything that is against the Lord.

We’ve heard David’s name come up related to Hezekiah, and we also now hear of Moses. He follows the commands God gave to Moses.

We won’t get into Hezekiah’s full story, and you can read in multiple places (Isaiah, 2 Kings, and here) of a desperate crisis. The great army of Assyria marches against the people of Israel, and it’s terrifying.

2 Chronicles 32:20–22 20King Hezekiah and the prophet Isaiah son of Amoz prayed about this and cried out to heaven, 21and the Lord sent an angel who annihilated every valiant warrior, leader, and commander in the camp of the king of Assyria. So the king of Assyria returned in disgrace to his land. He went to the temple of his god, and there some of his own children struck him down with the sword. 22So the Lord saved Hezekiah and the inhabitants of Jerusalem from the power of King Sennacherib of Assyria and from the power of all others. He gave them rest on every side.

Hezekiah personally EXPERIENCED SALVATION FROM THE LORD It’s miraculous and dramatic, as Hezekiah takes written threats, spreads them out before the altar and prays. God works! On this day, Assyria will know that the Lord is God. The story inspires us to cast our cares on Him.

One more thing stands out about the life of Hezekiah

2 Chr 32:24 – In those days Hezekiah became sick to the point of death, so he prayed to the Lord, who spoke to him and gave him a miraculous sign.

Again, there is a pretty detailed story about this in a few of the other accounts, but much like many of us in the room as we look at our lives.

Hezekiah RECEIVED BLESSINGS FROM THE LORD

The Lord listens, extends favor to Hezekiah, gives him life. The Lord did something miraculous for him. The Lord blessed Hezekiah.

Put all of those things together, and it’s powerful. We could preach and teach through each of those qualities. Such a good summary of a life. Such a good eulogy or obituary. He lived his life really well. That’s something I want for men and women, for every person here.

All these good things, and yet great starts don’t equal successful finishes. Before the final words are written about his life, we read other things. Listen carefully.  [2 Chronicles 32:24-31]

24In those days Hezekiah became sick to the point of death, so he prayed to the Lord, who spoke to him and gave him a miraculous sign. 25However, because his heart was proud, Hezekiah didn’t respond according to the benefit that had come to him. So there was wrath on him, Judah, and Jerusalem. 26Then Hezekiah humbled himself for the pride of his heart—he and the inhabitants of Jerusalem—so the Lord’s wrath didn’t come on them during Hezekiah’s lifetime.

There’s some lack of gratitude, or the wrong response. And that was driven by pride. God resists the proud. Pride goes before destruction, and a haughty spirit before a fall. There also seems to be another issue.

27Hezekiah had abundant riches and glory, and he made himself treasuries for silver, gold, precious stones, spices, shields, and every desirable item. 28He made warehouses for the harvest of grain, new wine, and fresh oil, and stalls for all kinds of cattle, and pens for flocks. 29He made cities for himself, and he acquired vast numbers of flocks and herds, for God gave him abundant possessions. 30This same Hezekiah blocked the upper outlet of the water from the Gihon Spring and channeled it smoothly downward and westward to the city of David. Hezekiah succeeded in everything he did.

All the treasuries, warehouses, stalls, cities, problem-solved. It was God’s gift —> led to his success. And yet it seems to set up an issue. I just read “himself.” How much of all this has begun to define Hezekiah?

31When the ambassadors of Babylon’s rulers were sent to him to inquire about the miraculous sign that happened in the land, God left him to test him and discover what was in his heart.

God allowed Hezekiah to be tested. What was going on in his heart. And the way I read this is that he didn’t pass the test. If we go to 2 Kings, it’s the same event with a different camera angle, and the replay zooms in.

2 Kings 20:12–19 12At that time Merodach-baladan son of Baladan, king of Babylon, sent letters and a gift to Hezekiah since he heard that he had been sick. 13Hezekiah listened to the letters and showed the envoys his whole treasure house—the silver, the gold, the spices, and the precious oil—and his armory, and everything that was found in his treasuries. There was nothing in his palace and in all his realm that Hezekiah did not show them. 14Then the prophet Isaiah came to King Hezekiah and asked him, “Where did these men come from and what did they say to you?” Hezekiah replied, “They came from a distant country, from Babylon.” 15Isaiah asked, “What have they seen in your palace?” Hezekiah answered, “They have seen everything in my palace. There isn’t anything in my treasuries that I didn’t show them.” 16Then Isaiah said to Hezekiah, “Hear the word of the Lord: 17‘Look, the days are coming when everything in your palace and all that your predecessors have stored up until today will be carried off to Babylon; nothing will be left,’ says the Lord. 18‘Some of your descendants—who come from you, whom you father—will be taken away, and they will become eunuchs in the palace of the king of Babylon.’ ”

We have pride + we have a great abundance of stuff. Was he showing off? Was he assuming that he was the one who had done it all? Was he flattered that he mattered to people in Babylon? Isaiah isn’t there to condone, he’s there to confront. Something seems off.

19Then Hezekiah said to Isaiah, “The word of the Lord that you have spoken is good,” for he thought, “Why not, if there will be peace and security during my lifetime?”

It seems so wrong to be so dismissive of all the disaster that will come next. He says, “Who cares about them if I can be relatively comfortable?”

Surely, we can’t expect a self-centered short-sighted outlook will have positive effects on the people we love down the road.

Hezekiah lived so well. And then there’s this. For me, it leaves a sour taste.

In some ways it’s hard to get your head around exactly all the things that are off. Writers do a fair amount of speculation, and this could be worth exploring further (some of you discuss the message in LifeGroup, and you could through where you sense things are off).

As much as I like neat, clean flow charts, and as much as I appreciate the engineer or the chemist that can say: “this leads to this, which causes this, and then out comes this.”

Life is complicated. Sin makes it more complicated. There are mixed motives. We have a few clues, and lots of questions, and whatever it is or was, something is off here.

And maybe the most important question to ask today, is do we have enough sensitivity and detectors should it happen to us? If somehow, the right set of circumstances (or WRONG set of circumstances) accelerated some things, caused things to boil up, what might happen?

Could you and I spend large parts our lives doing the right thing and somewhere lose our way and get off track?

David is conscientious, dependent on the Lord, victorious in battle, but then starts acquiring multiplies wives like they’re his property, less and less attentive to out-of-control family crises, commits adultery and in effect has someone murdered.

Solomon chapter after chapter does so many good things, then you open 2 Kings 11,  everything turns. Solomon’s heart is turned away to some blatant, awful idol-worship.

What happens? Is it just one moment, or do important priorities just erode, or do a series of compromises begin to stack up? Is it easy to pinpoint? What’s going on? I think we have just enough with Hezekiah to really listen when Proverbs says guard your heart above all else.

This isn’t about scare-tactics or hyper-picky legalism, but surely

A little frustration angry person   a doubt or two cynicism whining  deep bitterness            confidence deep pride

concern/worries  a life paralyzed by fear a few creature comforts —> self-indulgence some self-sufficiency independence, Lord not really present

I am not saying it happens overnight, but I am saying it can happen. When you observe the final scenes of Hezekiah’s life: foolish pride, self-centered shortsightedness where you can tell yourself “not my problem.”  It says something about the heart. It is a warning!

As this sits with us, we need to end in a different spot than “better be careful out there.” I think it warrants giving specific help. None of this seems hypothetical to me (myself or family or friends).

Ask the Lord to help you RUN your race (and not coast).

God begins a good work, He completes. And yet prayers are woven into His plan. There are moments where you could be less attentive, less careful, but what if those moments were where you consciously chose to reach out to the Father. I think he would be glad to help you in those moments navigate finishing well.

Read Proverbs with a friend, look for where you identify with warnings (where you might say “this is ME,” or “this could easily be me”)

Proverbs won’t go easy on the warnings. And that’s okay. Proverbs will paint a lot of sharp contrasts, and that’s what we need. Proverbs will call out pride, gossip, greed, anger, self-centeredness, and so much else. That will be helpful.

Be alert to & verbalize your own personal set of stubborn temptations.

Over time, one of the real signs of maturity is for you to know your weak spots. You don’t make excuses. Actually this helps you. You know what can trip you up. You try to avoid. You stay on guard.

Develop friendships where interactions are filled with grace & truth.

True friendships can say, “here’s what I noticed,” and the friendship will go deeper because of the honesty.

Intentionally seek to invest in what likely will outlive you.

Yes, treasures in heaven, but if there were places in your life where you looked at the next generation, and you did something or you cared in some way, that would be a game changer! It lifts you above the now

Keep your eyes on the real finish line

We will meet the Lord one day. Hezekiah would. And I wonder, if he kept that in view, if it would’ve knocked down his pride, if the Babylonians would’ve seemed like a very big deal, if his sons and grandsons following the Lord would’ve been more important to him.

Can you see the finish line? Age probably helps this, but it’s more of a heart thing. One day you will meet Jesus. His love for you will be the most real thing you’ve ever experienced. Is it worth it to finish well, especially because what you know of him is so sweet.

CLOSING: The message today has been in a different key. It is still a message of grace, God’s undeserved favor and kindness to sinners.

In John Newton’s words, this is the grace that teaches our heart to fear

“It’s when Scripture makes us tremble that we are actually the safest.” (Dale Ralph Davis)

Grace will sometimes give us warnings. In the end here’s what we know: our deepest hope will not be in all our willpower, or our failproof strategies to avoid every snare but in our faithful God who comes to our rescue

1 Corinthians 10:12–13 12So, whoever thinks he stands must be careful not to fall. 13No temptation has come upon you except what is common to humanity. But God is faithful; he will not allow you to be tempted beyond what you are able, but with the temptation he will also provide the way out so that you may be able to bear it.

Jude 24–25 24Now to him who is able to protect you from stumbling and to make you stand in the presence of his glory, without blemish and with great joy, 25to the only God our Savior, through Jesus Christ our Lord, be glory, majesty, power, and authority before all time, now and forever. Amen.

<><><><><>

6.21.2026    Brainerd Baptist Church