COMPLETE IN CHRIST A GOSPEL TEAM COLOSSIANS 4:7-18

INTRO: I’ve discovered something about myself. I love things related to teams (not Microsoft Teams!). But if there’s a good sports movie on a team, or a book about teams that work together to accomplish something, I am just almost always drawn in. Which may be a reason why the way Colossians ends has had such an appeal to me.

Profiles of individuals who are part of a gospel team. We read lots of names, but these are not just names called politely, but people who were invested in the mission of Jesus, seeing people called out of darkness into light, into the kingdom of Jesus.

READ TEXT (4:7-18)

A little context. What we’ve seen in Colossians is that because Jesus is preeminent, and we will only be complete in him (SERIES slide), people who love Him gather in his name and live out their faith together and grow together. And they also move out to speak to others. The mission is dynamic: there are people, places, pockets that need Jesus, so disciples of Jesus have a calling.

God uses individuals working together for His purposes. People who have seen life-change and they’re eager to see more.

All Christians play a role in that, not just those who are clergy or missions or work for non-profits. With Colossians, even though we don’t know all aspects of the story, all details, God is clearly writing a story here, and I want us to see the kinds of people God uses for a kingdom expansion. You might discover YOU have a role to play.

Let’s go back to verse 7.

7Tychicus, our dearly loved brother, faithful minister, and fellow servant in the Lord, will tell you all the news about me. 8I have sent him to you for this very purpose, so that you may know how we are and so that he may encourage your hearts.

Let’s start with Tychicus. We’ve read that Paul is under very unique circumstances (he’s in prison). But, he doesn’t want to be completely isolated from people that matter deeply to him. He wants to communicate.

Tychicus is here, He shows up and does this repeatedly in Acts, Ephesians, 2 Timothy, Titus. He’s the courier, connector, letter reader. He takes news from Paul and to Paul.

Which is why to Paul he’s the dearly loved brother, faithful minister, and fellow servant in the Lord. Paul counted on him.

With Tychicus, we see there’s a ministry of CONNECTION

There are people who are especially essential in bringing and keeping God’s people together.

When you care deeply and you’re separated, it’s easy to get concerned, nervous about how friends are doing. It’s helpful when someone has laid eyes on them. Tychicus is not the conduit of gossip, but encouragement.

He decides to keep lines of communication open, pass on news.

Could God use you in this way? Some of you already play the role of sending texts or emails, connecting friends, making sure someone knows how they could serve or help, try to be a vehicle of communication. What a vital role! We need that as a church.

Let’s keep reading, because there are more people who make up the gospel team

9He (Tychicus) is coming with Onesimus, a faithful and dearly loved brother, who is one of you. They will tell you about everything here. 10Aristarchus, my fellow prisoner, sends you greetings, as does Mark, Barnabas’s cousin (concerning whom you have received instructions: if he comes to you, welcome him),

A couple of individuals who have “backstories”

Onesimus – Paul calls him faithful, and dearly loved. Several missing pieces of O’s story. But reading this with Philemon, he’s a runaway bondservant who “happened” to meet Paul. God is bringing him back to Colossae (even to his master) He is a changed person, and his presence will change their fellowship, push in all the right direction. God working through circumstances to rescue lives.

Mark, the cousin of Barnabas. He has an interesting story. Acts 13, he was on the first mission trip launched from Antioch, but then he abandoned the group, issue in the future of whether to take him (Acts 15); this is 12 years later. And Paul is now saying, welcome him!

The ministry of GRACE-REMINDING

The gospel team is compiled of people who have had some tough stuff in their lives. It’s not shiny, it’s messy, some things are self-inflicted, and yet God works, brings them together for the mission.

I am not saying life after a blow-up or a blow-out is easy. I am not saying there aren’t consequences. Of course, there are things that would could pose challenges and roadblocks.

In a sense all of us are reminders of how God has shown grace. But, some stories are so compelling, they just really underline the point.

What I am saying is that I’ve walked with people who have had affairs (or been cheated on), have experienced grace upon repentance.

Addiction recovery, divorce, or abuse, blended, steps and half-siblings failed as parents, rebelled against their parents hurt other people deeply, Quit, got distracted Broken, mentally & emotionally

Those stories are all over this room today. You do know that, don’t you?

With all that in mind, could God be preparing to use you? Could your story which might have brought shame at one point. Could God mend and restore and then serve others with a reminder that God’s grace really does work and works deeply. God uses broken things. He enjoys that. That is some of His best work. Jesus seemed to think so when he told the story of the Prodigal Son.

We do have some more names who are a part of the Gospel Team.

10Aristarchus, my fellow prisoner, sends you greetings, as does Mark, Barnabas’s cousin (concerning whom you have received instructions: if he comes to you, welcome him), 11and so does Jesus who is called Justus. These alone of the circumcised are my coworkers for the kingdom of God, and they have been a comfort to me.

We can read in other places that Aristarchus was a Macedonian traveling companion of Paul (Acts 19-20 and Ephesians). In Ephesus, he was seized during a riot. Aristarchus accompanied Paul as he traveled to so many places from Greece/Rome.

Here, he’s called a fellow prisoner, which seems to indicate he was so deeply committed to the Lord, so deeply committed to Paul, that his freedom had been taken away.

The other person is Jesus, called Justus (the Righteous, does the right thing). So few seemed to be attached to Paul in this season. But these two had hung in there and it meant something to Paul.

There is a ministry of ORDINARY FAITHFULNESS

Not everyone will be that well known. A lot of really important people in the world, and some may not rank where others know them too well. But they regularly do the right thing!

They are coworkers for the kingdom of God. Acts 28:31 ends with Paul proclaiming the kingdom of God and teaching about Christ. This was a major deal to him.

Jesus Christ brings the kingdom. It arrives. He rules and reigns. And yet there is more that will see. The kingdom develops and grows, and we’re still waiting for the full dimensions of what it looks like when Jesus sets up His kingdom and totally rules the world with truth and grace.

Could God use you in this ordinary way? Could you be the person that plays a role in God’s advance of His kingdom through steady faithfulness?

Not a big splash, but showing up, steady generosity so much probably shows up outside of church, not just in it

a lot of little things done well, faithful and full of integrity in callings

this doesn’t have to wait until you’ve reached a certain age

when you have authority, people flourish; when you’re under authority, your supervisor knows you can be trusted.

you tell the truth, you are kind, you find a place of service, and you can be counted on.

This is the ministry some of you have of remembering names, facilitating a group, cleaning up afterward, preparing a lesson to teach. You don’t need applause, recognition. You just are serving Jesus.

We also come across someone we heard about early in Colossians.

12Epaphras, who is one of you, a servant of Christ Jesus, sends you greetings. He is always wrestling for you in his prayers, so that you can stand mature and fully assured in everything God wills. 13For I testify about him that he works hard for you, for those in Laodicea, and Hierapolis.

Notice what it emphasizes about him. He’s a servant. Jesus Christ rules his life, sets the agenda, determines what– enlisted in the Lord.

And He regularly prays for them. Paul is praying for them regularly, and so is Epaphras.

This adds another layer. He wrestles for them in prayer. Paul was striving for them as well. There are athletic connotations. There is just strenuous, consistent intervention with the Lord on behalf of the Colossians.

Epaphras knows there are people who could deceive these believers or actually make it harder to walk with Jesus, so he’s faithful

The ministry of WRESTLING IN PRAYER

He sees the end goal and keeps it in his view – people standing mature, people fully assured (not filled with a million doubts)

He wants them confirmed in God’s will. True fullness, not some mysterious thing out there, not even keeping all the rules, but it’s knowing Jesus, walking with him, rooted and established in His grace.

He works HARD for you. Not just work but really hard work

gospel defended, what they think, what they value, who/what might attack, how to help, how to care – difficult and taxing

He even had a wider care (Laodicea, Hierapolis, a triangle of cities with churches). I watch people who grow in their capacity to care?

My question – could that be you? Could you be the hard worker?

You keep pursuing, you don’t quit. You wrestle with caring for people. You do some serious prayer work (kids, grandkids, friends, fellow church members). They are depending on you.

They’re going to cross the finish line, because God used YOUR prayers to get them there. That would be amazing work for you to do.

We keep working through the names of the Team…

14Luke, the dearly loved physician, and Demas send you greetings.

This represents lives going down very different paths.

Among other things, Luke will have the ministry of LOYAL FRIENDSHIP

It seems like Luke is regularly present with Paul, especially in Acts. As you read along, occasionally you read the word “WE” and you realize, Luke is a traveling companion. He goes to Palestine, Macedonia/Greece, Rome.

He records what happens. He documents the trips and the travels. He’s a physician, and he seems especially interested in miracles that are in the healing arena.

When Paul writes at the very end of his life in 2 Timothy 4:11, he says “Only Luke is with me.” And you hear some loneliness. But Luke is there. Luke cares. What a ministry.

Especially because Demas turns out to be a different story altogether. We read about him in 2 Timothy 4:9-12. It’s written a few years later. Paul says bluntly that Demas abandoned him because he was in love with the world.

You don’t read a million of these in the NT, but one is enough. The heartbreak. Of course, life changes, and friendships have high points and low points, but this has a faith component to it doesn’t it. Demas leaves Paul, and he leaves the path of walking with Jesus, not being conformed to this world, but being transformed.

It hurts to read. I was talking with a friend recently, and we were just noting that some friends we’ve had over the years are still walking with the Lord, still faithful, but a few have fallen away. It just hurts. It would hurt if I heard that about you. It would hurt if you heard that about me.

Brainerd, I am burdened that our friendships around Jesus grow deep. Can I speak to guys? I am burdened for you!

I wonder if you will be the loyal friend. I think you could be. You could hang in there. You don’t have to desert. You can trust and can be worthy of the trust of a good friend.

Can church be the place where we find friends? Can it be that safe? Can we work to help each other walk faithfully?

There are 2 more, I want us to pay attention to.

15Give my greetings to the brothers and sisters in Laodicea, and to Nympha and the church in her home. 16After this letter has been read at your gathering, have it read also in the church of the Laodiceans; and see that you also read the letter from Laodicea. 17And tell Archippus, “Pay attention to the ministry you have received in the Lord, so that you can accomplish it.”

I see this as the ministry of OWNING RESPONSIBILITY

For someone like Nympha, she offers up her home. Often in that culture, homeowners were male, except for widows, particularly widows who had some wealth. So, we might be speculating, but what we do know is that she regularly opened her home for ministry.

I was with a small group of believers not that long ago in a home. And it wasn’t a large home, and it was really crowded (and it got a little toasty), but we sang, prayed, talked about the Word, shared life.

Our culture more and more has pulled back on opening homes. But what if Christians were different. What if Brainerd looked different

What if some of the most beautiful work that God is doing happened on Sunday afternoons after church, or over dinner, or dessert. Not fancy, just warm. What has the Lord given to me, and how do I use it for Him.

For Archippus, it sounds a little different. He’s urged to “complete the work/ministry, the Lord gave you.”

What assignment did he have from the Lord? Maybe it was ministry in another town, teaching younger believers, some have even speculated that the ministry was financial.

And Paul is like, God has given you this ministry, service, do it. Finish it. Complete it. Don’t quit!

The more time goes by, the more I value the person that doesn’t quit. That could be your contribution to the team. You hang in there, and you can see things through

Conclusion: So we’ve heard of Paul’s gospel team. Can you see why I love it? Those names mean so much to me, because their Scripture. But for me, your names mean more to me. What God is doing now. How God is working through you now. I think of

VBS this week, what we do around the world, year after year. 1000’s of volunteer hours.

LifeGroups, and KidsMin, and Student Ministry. I think of how many of you are in a better place now than you were a year ago or 2 or 5.

the thousands of connections you have, the friendships, the neighbors, the work relationships.

God has brought and is bringing together a gospel team. A prayer of dedication

Lord, I want to be a part of your gospel team. I want my life to count for your purposes, for your glory. Show me my role, Lord. Grow me into the person you want me to be. If that’s your heart, in a moment I am going to ask you to put your hand up.

<><><><><>

5.31.2026    Brainerd Baptist Church