EASTER EXPECTATIONSLUKE 24

INTRO: You might be like our family. Almost every summer, sometimes over a Christmas break, sometimes over spring break, we plan a trip, a vacation. Then we fill weeks before that vacation with lots of expectation. We could do ___, we need to ___, let’s go back here, won’t it be nice to  __, if we can just get _____. We all have expectations, don’t we.

I looked at several descriptions and definitions of expectation, and pieced together this: Expectation is the story you’ve already written about how something will turn out.

The way life works is that what actually happens (reality) will be compared to that story. Expectations become a powerful thing.

The accounts in Scripture of Jesus rising from the dead are accounts of people dealing with what I will call Easter Expectations. By God’s grace we get to walk with a couple of original followers of Jesus as they process out loud some of what’s going on in their mind on Resurrection Sunday.

13-21– 13Now that same day two of them were on their way to a village called Emmaus, which was about seven miles from Jerusalem. 14Together they were discussing everything that had taken place. 15And while they were discussing and arguing, Jesus himself came near and began to walk along with them. 16But they were prevented from recognizing him. 17Then he asked them, “What is this dispute that you’re having with each other as you are walking?” And they stopped walking and looked discouraged. 18The one named Cleopas answered him, “Are you the only visitor in Jerusalem who doesn’t know the things that happened there in these days?” 19“What things?” he asked them. So they said to him, “The things concerning Jesus of Nazareth, who was a prophet powerful in action and speech before God and all the people, 20and how our chief priests and leaders handed him over to be sentenced to death, and they crucified him. 21But we were hoping that he was the one who was about to redeem Israel.

It’s hard to imagine Jesus ever disappointing anyone. That he would fall short of expectations, and not to live up to them. And yet – “we were hoping that he was the one who was about to redeem Israel.” We had this story already written about how this all would turn out

This resurrection story begins with UNMET EXPECTATIONS

For them: Can you hear the “story they had already written about how everything would turn out”? Undoubtedly, expectations around Jesus near the end of his life were justifiably high.

He was recognized as a “prophet”, speaking for God (19)

He spoke and lived with moral clarity and consistency. He had an independent voice (not in anyone’s back pocket). Establishment saw him as a threat

He spoke of the big, important things: God’s greater plan through Abraham, David, Jacob, heaven/hell, soul, life, finding meaning, being connected to God

Powerful in action – He has the power to back all that up… which would be essential to do what they thought he was going to do.

Powerful in speech. Jesus spoke with such authority. He lets us know He brokers the most important things

I am the light of the world – you won’t be in spiritual darkness…bread of life, living water – you will be sustained spiritually…the door – you will have access to God through me…the good shepherd – you will be guided, fed, protected through me…the resurrection – death won’t be your final reality through me

“We were hoping” that a lot of good things were about to go down.  And in a whirlwind DEATH ends all of it… “Chief priests handed him over, He was crucified.” What we had hoped for died a couple of days ago.

Nothing like death to bring disorientation They deal with confusion, struggle to interpret anything else. Hearing reports, supernatural things, are they true? what’s going on? What story should be believe?

Unmet expectations. That’s them, but what about…our own unmet expectations

If you’ve ever experienced the death of someone you cared about, you know so much ends, it’s not the story we wrote, and it can be so confusing

And, life is also filled with a 1000 other smaller deaths

dreams die, ambitions become a joke, marriage/relationship falls apartit becomes clear life isn’t really working…at a different place by this point in your life, here you still areA story of how you would fill roles – it hasn’t happeneda story of how powerful you could become, instead you feel helpless

It is disorienting – what we thought we wanted, what we thought we had, life didn’t turn out that way!

I can say, “that’s life.” But, an answer like that really doesn’t help anything. You wrote a story, it’s not there, and it’s sad.

When I read the Bible sometimes it seems like when I start it’s in a totally different world, only to realize how much just isn’t that different.

In unmet expectations, we need to hear Jesus speak. We live by what comes out of his mouth. Even though they don’t immediately recognize him, there is no one like Jesus to put things in context, to give clarity

25–27 25He said to them, “How foolish you are, and how slow to believe all that the prophets have spoken! 26Wasn’t it necessary for the Messiah to suffer these things and enter into his glory?” 27Then beginning with Moses and all the Prophets, he interpreted for them the things concerning himself in all the Scriptures.

What you hear in the words of Jesus is a reset.

What Jesus does is to RESET EXPECTATIONS

To be clear, by that I don’t mean he lowers expectations. Not at all.

Jesus speaks frankly – you’ve been foolish, slow to believe. He’s not putting them down. But he is saying, “You should’ve gotten there.” When Jesus speaks it comes with such authority and clarity. His words will be always helpful.

What their expectations likely were: Jesus would act as Messiah (anointed deliverer, rescuer above all rescuers). He would conquer, rule, reward, restore every blessing to them right then, right there.

Jesus is saying, that’s the story YOU had written, but he’s reminding them that the prophets didn’t miss here, the pathway was there for you to see.

Messiah had to SUFFER – he would be innocent yet wounded, looking to the cross, pierced, cursed, bearing sin for the guilty, shame

This was promised, and it was NECESSARY. There was such a deep and costly breach between us and God. A sacrifice driven by love. So, it happened. There was never going to be shortcuts/workarounds.

Then (only then) Messiah experiences GLORY – life, resurrection. They had heard indications that Jesus was alive. Those weren’t rumors. This was always how it was going to go. Heavy, weighty resurrection has happened.

He gives an epic Bible lesson about the Messiah. “he interpreted for them the things concerning himself in all the Scriptures”

Literally everything written in your Scriptures was pointing to me (the Messiah). Adam, David, Elijah, Jonah, Daniel

Their expectations are completely reset.

Our expectations often need a reset as well. And nothing about that is easy. But sometimes we have to face the hard reality that we’ve had the wrong story written, and we need the gentle but firm voice of Jesus speaking honestly at our moments especially when…

You had this story of the picture-perfect life. You’ve tried to be a good person and do the best you can, and it just isn’t happening. You thought you’d be loved, appreciated, a good grandma with a great relationship with your family, have a happy life. You thought there wouldn’t be a ton of hurt. The story isn’t coming true. Lots of things are breaking down.

Are you prepared for a reset? The stories God writes in this broken world are the real and honest ones, filled with grief and pain, truckloads of grace. Through suffering a while, God establishes, makes you whole, even though it’s often not immediately, works all things together for good. He finishes what he starts. It’s a reset.

Maybe your story had God being like the parent who’s teaching a kid to ride a bike. He would give you a shove to get you started, but life would be mostly about you riding your bike on your own.

Here you are…something’s missing, something is off and even beyond that, you’re getting pounded. What’s up with that?

Expectations have to be reset. God’s work in your life is way more personal than you wrote. Your strength will constantly need to be renewed by him. He will be your anchor every moment of your life. His presence, his help, his sympathy will be daily bread, the mercy you need each morning. You will need Him, and he will be there for you.

What I am talking about is really tough, and I’m saying the stories we’ve already written often need a reset

Jesus speaks. It’s authoritative. There’s a finality about it. Yet it’s never cold and detached. He doesn’t lob things in from the cheap seats. Jesus is always with his people, in the trenches. He comes for a reason. He walks them through this personally. He even eats with them. The scene unfolds.

28–29 28They came near the village where they were going, and he gave the impression that he was going farther. 29But they urged him, “Stay with us, because it’s almost evening, and now the day is almost over.” So he went in to stay with them.

As I’ve read this next part a few times, I’ve wondered…

Had these disciples been there where he fed thousands of people.And were these disciples in the Upper Room when he broke bread

Because the way this is written, some of the exact words used in those scenes are used in this one.

30–32 30It was as he reclined at the table with them that he took the bread, blessed and broke it, and gave it to them. 31Then their eyes were opened, and they recognized him, but he disappeared from their sight. 32They said to each other, “Weren’t our hearts burning within us while he was talking with us on the road and explaining the Scriptures to us?”

Maybe like them a couple of things are clicking for you. Your heart is burning, your spiritual eyes are being opened one more time. What does it all mean, what could it all mean?

You pick up later and Jesus is still speaking the same kinds of things about his death, resurrection, Scriptures, about expectations.

44-46 44He told them, “These are my words that I spoke to you while I was still with you—that everything written about me in the Law of Moses, the Prophets, and the Psalms must be fulfilled.” 45Then he opened their minds to understand the Scriptures. 46He also said to them, “This is what is written: The Messiah will suffer and rise from the dead the third day,

He opened their minds to understand. And he goes on to say more

47-49 – 47and repentance for forgiveness of sins will be proclaimed in his name to all the nations, beginning at Jerusalem. 48You are witnesses of these things. 49And look, I am sending you what my Father promised. As for you, stay in the city until you are empowered from on high.”

This would’ve been far more than they could’ve ever expected. A steady theme when it comes to expectations, is that God just overdoes it.

We pray to one who is able to do above and beyond all that we ask or imagine. (Eph 3:20)

What awaits us as we die is absolutely incomparable to everything we go through now. (2 Co 4:17 )

God reveals things we could never figure out on our own. (Jer 33:3)

He always overdoes it.

What Jesus does here (and continually) is to EXCEED EXPECTATIONS

With Jesus, you won’t be ultimately disappointed. You won’t come out on the short end of the stick. Your life won’t go up in smoke. There will be no “it is what it is.” Not at all!

Jesus loves you way too much to let that happen. Yes, life will be hard, and the story you wrote will need to be reset, but Jesus will be with you, you will hang in there and endure. He’ll see this through beyond your expectations.

This is where even though you weren’t there, your life, your story merges with these disciples.  What Jesus talked about: repentance, forgiveness, being witnesses, being empowered from on high. That’s not just for them, but for you as well.

Sometimes we have these baseline expectations for what we think religion can do. Jesus consistently exceeds them.

You expect to find this pathway to being a better version of yourself

He exceeds that. You hear from Jesus that you won’t be locked in to a life of sin – repentance (change in mind/direction) is a possibility and becomes a reality, completely rewired from the inside out.

You hope a Jesus-encounter might help you get a few things straightened out, deal with a few nagging flaws/problems.

Instead Jesus exceeds that with a deep release of all your sins: forgiveness. Not just transactional (you do this, he does this), but deeply personal, where you know you’re deeply loved.

You might have written a story where God works through really important, gifted, talented, influential people (and you think “I’m not that!”)

And yet, does it blow your mind that YOU have a role in spreading a message about him around the world – as witnesses, affirming, yes it’s all true. He continually exceeds expectations.

You assumed the memory of Jesus was just like for some inspiration, or motivation to be all you can be.

Instead, you hear about being sent with a promise, empowered from on high. That actually meant (and MEANS!) the Holy Spirit lives in people (YOU!). God with you always, literally never leaving you. Not as just inspiration, but your life and breath. Expectations exceeded.

They hear and we hear that Jesus being temporarily out of view, out of sight, won’t be a handicap, it catalyzes the presence of Jesus through the Holy Spirit with all people: comforting, guiding, convicting, helping.

CONCLUSIONLife wasn’t the same for the people that had to deal with their expectations.

52After worshiping him, they returned to Jerusalem with great joy. 53And they were continually in the temple praising God.

That’s what I want for you. What are your EASTER EXPECTATIONS. You might be the person who walked in with unmet expectations. What I want for each of you: an eye-opening, heart-filling life-changing encounter with Jesus where you walk into your Monday (and the rest of your life) with joy, because you know it’s true, it’s better, and He is with you.

I think some of the best news is that Jesus still extends an invitation – He wants YOU to come. If you’re like me, you don’t have everything figured out, but if it’s become undeniably real to you, and you’re wondering “what’s next,” this could be a start…

TURN – a lot of life we know isn’t right, a lot of life we try to do on our own, turn (repentance) and ask him for forgiveness

TRUST – Jesus, the story you write of taking my place on the cross, rising from the dead for me, is something I receive and will rely on. I trust you

TALK – something this important, it’s worth reaching out, asking for some guidance, some help. That is why pastors will be here after the service, this week, the weeks to come.

So, what is your next step? Can I urge you to take it!?

We started with “we had hoped he was the one.”

Friends, he was the one, He is the one, and you and I don’t even know the half of what God has in store for those who are trusting in Jesus.

<><><><><>

4.5.2026  Brainerd Baptist Church