OT REVISITED UNANSWERED PRAYER 1 KINGS 19

Things happened when the prophet Elijah prayed. That’s what James says

5:16–18 16bThe prayer of a righteous person is very powerful in its effect. 17Elijah was a human being as we are, and he prayed earnestly that it would not rain, and for three years and six months it did not rain on the land. 18Then he prayed again, and the sky gave rain and the land produced its fruit.

But there was a time when Elijah asked God to do something, and God didn’t do it, and that’s what I want to share with you today. Does that ever happen to you? You ask God for something, and it doesn’t happen.

For a few weeks, Lord-willing, we’ll be revisiting OT [series] characters and stories; according to 1 Corinthians they give us examples, according to Romans they instruct us and give us encouragement.

Today, we will be in 1 Kings 19, and let me quickly set the stage

in 1 Ki 19, Elijah the prophet is on the run, and he’s on the run

B/c Queen Jezebel has made real threats. She made threats

b/c in an epic encounter in 1 Ki 18, Elijah had devastated the prophets of Baal. The questions on the table…Who really is God? Who will show power? The one true God, or the false God?

The true God won which led to mass execution of the false prophets, who were leading Israel astray, and 1 Kings 19 deals with the aftermath.

1Ahab told Jezebel everything that Elijah had done and how he had killed all the prophets with the sword. 2So Jezebel sent a messenger to Elijah, saying, “May the gods punish me and do so severely if I don’t make your life like the life of one of them by this time tomorrow!” 3Then Elijah became afraid and immediately ran for his life. When he came to Beer-sheba that belonged to Judah, he left his servant there, 4but he went on a day’s journey into the wilderness. He sat down under a broom tree and prayed that he might die. He said, “I have had enough! Lord, take my life, for I’m no better than my ancestors.”

There it is: Lord, take my life. And yet, that’s exactly what God doesn’t do. To be abundantly clear, God never just “does what we tell Him to do.” He’s God  and we’re not! But, I think you get where I am coming from.

Where is Elijah right then? In the wilderness is technically the correct answer. Where is he spiritually, emotionally, mentally?

He’s desperate. Life has intensified for him. We don’t have enough information to know for certain what’s going on in his brain chemistry, mental health or even his emotional processing.

Still, based on what Scripture says, we know some things…

Pressure of dealing with threats – there was real fear

Weariness of being light in darkness – Elijah stood up, led a charge, spoke out of really deep frustration as to where lots of circumstances are

Isolation – he’s more alone (it seems like he chose that)

Loss of hope – there’s not a good future on the horizon

This is Elijah: “Take my life, Lord.” There are moments, when we definitely aren’t at our best

We don’t really articulate true things about God. And we haven’t surveyed all the angles, exhausted all options. Our expectations are faulty. We had thought some things would resolve quick, easy

So, what does God do with prayer requests that are “off,” that aren’t good ones. He didn’t answer this one. God doesn’t always do what we tell him to do, and that’s a good thing.  Let’s keep reading

4He sat down under a broom tree and prayed that he might die. He said, “I have had enough! Lord, take my life, for I’m no better than my ancestors.” 5Then he lay down and slept under the broom tree. Suddenly, an angel touched him. The angel told him, “Get up and eat.” 6Then he looked, and there at his head was a loaf of bread baked over hot stones, and a jug of water. So he ate and drank and lay down again. 7Then the angel of the Lord returned for a second time and touched him. He said, “Get up and eat, or the journey will be too much for you.”

Yes, sometimes we miss it when we ask the Lord for some things. But, God doesn’t ignore us, even when he doesn’t do exactly what we tell him to do. I find a couple of aspects to this story that are very comforting.

1.     We are in the presence of a God who really cares

2. We have the privilege of being part of something much bigger.

WE ARE IN THE PRESENCE OF A GOD WHO REALLY CARES

When you’re particularly vulnerable, you need to know that the Lord is really present. He’s there.

Psalm 139 – where could I go from your presence 2 Timothy 4 – The Lord stood by and strengthened me Matthew 28 – I am with you always Hebrews 13 – Hasn’t he promised, I will never leave you or forsake you.

Elijah experiences all of that firsthand. It’s interesting to me to see the ways in which the Lord draws near (not at a distance)

The Lord gives Elijah food/sleep, just BASIC PROVISIONS and delivers them through an extraordinary, angelic messenger. This happens twice

sleep / food – just what he needs! He’s exhausted and he’s hungry. The first move is NOT giving Elijah an attitude adjustment. Although, let’s be honest, we all could use one.

God has no problem correcting, rebuking, exposing, humbling. He will do it as needed. Here though the first move is to give the basics.

Elijah keeps moving

8So he got up, ate, and drank. Then on the strength from that food, he walked forty days and forty nights to Horeb, the mountain of God.

this is another name for Mt Sinai, where Moses got the 10 Commands.

9He entered a cave there and spent the night. Suddenly, the word of the Lord came to him, and he said to him, “What are you doing here, Elijah?”

We will get to how he answered that question (you actually see that the Lord asked the question twice), but I just appreciate the opportunity the Lord gives Elijah to speak. It’s more than an opportunity, it’s a direct question, really a direct invitation for Elijah to UNBURDEN HIS SOUL.

Psalm 62 – pour out your heart to him Psalm 120 – I cried to the Lord, and he heard me Provevbs 15:29 – The Lord hears the cry of the righteous

God listens.

Imagine a 3rd grade classroom. There’s been an incident. The teacher may have a good idea of what it was, who caused what! She approaches a kid who is really out of sorts, emotional, struggling, trying to defend himself. Of course, the teacher is in charge, but before cutting the kid off, launching into discipline mode, or escalating the situation. The teacher says, settle down, talk to me, what’s going on, what happened. What happens for that kid? He’s thinking, “She’s going to listen.”

With infinite knowledge of the complete picture does the Lord do something in that vein here?

For us: the minor/major injustices, how you were misunderstood, how some things were overlooked, the no-win situation that really frustrates you, where you feel inadequate.

You get a chance to speak. God gave you the green light. What a gift!

Elijah unburdens his soul.

10He replied, “I have been very zealous for the Lord God of Armies, but the Israelites have abandoned your covenant, torn down your altars, and killed your prophets with the sword. I alone am left, and they are looking for me to take my life.” 11Then he said, “Go out and stand on the mountain in the Lord’s presence.” At that moment, the Lord passed by. A great and mighty wind was tearing at the mountains and was shattering cliffs before the Lord, but the Lord was not in the wind. After the wind there was an earthquake, but the Lord was not in the earthquake. 12After the earthquake there was a fire, but the Lord was not in the fire. And after the fire there was a voice, a soft whisper. 13When Elijah heard it, he wrapped his face in his mantle and went out and stood at the entrance of the cave. Suddenly, a voice came to him and said, “What are you doing here, Elijah?” 14“I have been very zealous for the Lord God of Armies,” he replied, “but the Israelites have abandoned your covenant, torn down your altars, and killed your prophets with the sword. I alone am left, and they’re looking for me to take my life.”

Those are some of the more powerful verses you will read in Scripture, and so much is going on. There is an unburdening.

Elijah says there’s been covenant abandonment/betrayal. God’s people were so compromised, even a renewal effort isn’t going far

Desecrated places of worship. Isolation – your situation might be at school, work, family (you aren’t seeing others, and it just makes it hard)

Massive target on my back (which he wasn’t wrong)

But don’t miss the DRAMATIC ENCOUNTER WITH THE LORD.  Elijah is at Mt. Horeb/Sinai. This is where Moses was a few hundred years before. Sinai had been a scene of lightning [Exodus 19]. GOD spoke there.

God gave the law, and weighed out judgments. This is right/wrong. Thou shalt, thou shalt not.

God initiates. God acts. God speaks. That’s how God makes a covenant with us. There is no path we create to God. There is HIS invitation to us. That’s why Jesus came to us. We would not have made our way to God. If you are far from him, and feel compelled to draw near, that’s HIS gift to you. Don’t refuse that gift!

I think the mountain is like a courtroom scene – God’s people will be judged, even as Elijah has been faithful.

But slow down. On this day, the reminder is it won’t always be in the fireworks, but in the steady voice of the Lord (even a whisper), nations will rise/fall, rulers will rise to power and be brutally thrown out.

We love the big, emotional moments. They can be helpful in getting our attention and even turning us around when we’ve strayed.

There won’t always be the fireworks you saw in 1 Kings 18. The fireworks don’t sustain you, but there will be the voice of the Lord, and he is still speaking, moving. God is THAT powerful. His words are something you can base your life on.

Put this together. God doesn’t do what Elijah says (take my life, Lord), and yet at the moment that Elijah needed the Lord, the Lord met him!

If you have yet to meet Him personally, this is what your soul longs for.

Not a God who keeps his distance, and tells you to figure it out.

But also, not a God who can’t really do anything, who just listens to our complaint and the best response he can give is something like, “I know, right. That’s messed up.” And that’s all they offer.

No. He is in charge, sovereign. He cares, loves. He resets, rules, judges. Who is like the Lord? That is who can save you.

The Lord isn’t done talking

15Then the Lord said to him, “Go and return by the way you came to the Wilderness of Damascus. When you arrive, you are to anoint Hazael as king over Aram. 16You are to anoint Jehu son of Nimshi as king over Israel and Elisha son of Shaphat from Abel-meholah as prophet in your place. 17Then Jehu will put to death whoever escapes the sword of Hazael, and Elisha will put to death whoever escapes the sword of Jehu. 18But I will leave seven thousand in Israel—every knee that has not bowed to Baal and every mouth that has not kissed him.”

If one very comforting aspect of this encounter is that we live in the presence of a God who really cares, another is that…

WE HAVE THE PRIVILEGE OF BEING PART OF SOMETHING BIGGER

Interwoven with what God is doing in OUR lives is what He’s doing on a much larger scale. I mean like an eternal, global, universal scale.

One of the real areas of struggle I hear with Elijah is his world gets smaller and he doesn’t really trust the future. He seemed to be on the verge of losing hope (which is why he was telling God what he wanted him to do). And how kind of the Lord to give future-oriented next steps.

We don’t have time to track everything down, but what God says involves people – kings (like Hazael/Jehu) that will be used by God to judge

Elisha – a successor who would be a prophet (lives twice as long, almost twice as many miraculous encounters). That was Elisha’s future, but his present assignment would be to accompany Elijah

7000 – a remnant that wouldn’t cave (no Baal, no compromised, not going to) – a remnant of God’s people that will be faithful.

It was just God, Elijah on a mountain. And yet God was doing something on such a different scale. Elijah would play a role.

You need to see more. You need eyes to see that your job, your home, family situation, faithfulness is part of something bigger.

student, grandparent, single, minimum wage, rebuild, growth

As you look at your life, it’s not always going to be easy to see, but God is taking millions and millions of stories and he is working out a plan that’s beyond our understanding. Your life is a part of it.

Whenever we feel small, alone, a number worth remembering might be 7003 (7000 + H + J + E). I am not alone. God is going to do something.

For most of us, it’s hard to live life without real gaps forming at times between what we see happening, and what we think is for our best. When you come to those gaps, you either fill them with

despair and this sinking feeling it’s not going to be okay. Things aren’t going to work out for your good, flood of doubts or self-pity

or over-functioning, bull by the horns, will things to a better place

deep trust and active patience – you’re still walking with hope in the Lord, not yourself and even if the circumstances don’t go exactly like you want, you’re going to make it, because of who He is

CONCLUSION: One of the most ironic aspects to God not answering Elijah’s request, not doing what Elijah told him to do, happens a few years later. We’re now in 2 Kings 2

2:11 As [Elijah and Elisha] continued walking and talking, a chariot of fire with horses of fire suddenly appeared and separated the two of them. Then Elijah went up into heaven in the whirlwind.

Take my life, Lord. I guess God finally does take Elijah. He doesn’t end his life. He just transports Him into his presence.

I am not saying a fiery chariot will come for you, and that’s the way it all wraps up. One day, if you’re a believer, one way or another, you will meet the Lord. On that day, you will internalize Eph 3:20-21 like never before

Ephesians 3:20–21 20Now to him who is able to do above and beyond all that we ask or think according to the power that works in us— 21to him be glory in the church and in Christ Jesus to all generations, forever and ever. Amen.

And every request that you thought God didn’t hear, didn’t answer, didn’t make happen. Everything that seemed unfulfilled will be put into perspective, as only God can put things into perspective.  And for now, we pray, trust, love, hope, we wait.

<><><><><>

6.14.2026    Brainerd Baptist Church