BEHIND THE SCENES SEEING A THREAD ESTHER 2:21-3:15

INTRO:  For as long as I can remember, my mom has knitted amazing  blankets and sweaters. So very early on, I saw her take this one thread of yarn, intricately weave it together. And if you were to pull on that thread, you would quickly see how it was all very connected.

That helps me to appreciate an aspect of Scripture. Scripture has threads – patterns, events, characters that show up repeatedly and intentionally in Scripture. These threads help us know and understand God. They give us deeper reliance on him in situations in our own lives.

Today, we’ll continue through Esther. We’re seeing how God is working behind the scenes (even though his name isn’t mentioned). I’m going to read several verses and then we’ll pull a thread to see what it all means for us. READ ESTHER 2:21-3:15 then SERIES slide.

What did you notice in these verses? Which threads would you pull?

Thread of God’s Providence – Mordecai in chapter 2, in just the right place, right time, lining things up for what we will read later. With Esther there are similarities Joseph, Daniel or Nehemiah.

The thread of Foolish Pride – Just like with the king in chap. 1, another personal slight elevates to a national/international concern (vs 5-6). Proverbs warned us about foolish people.

Thread of the dark side of Pur/Casting Lots (v7) – where people live in worlds of stars, luck, chance, fate, rather than bowing before the one true God who has revealed himself, people are willing to go to dark places.

The thread of lies (8) and bribes (9) in targeting a people. We could see in verse 8 how Haman (mis)uses half-truths and outright lies. Herod, or wicked kings/Pharoah’s in the Bible. There’s violence when we say Auschwitz/Dachau, Pol Pot, Rwanda/Sudan, Isis.

The thread of tone-deaf people (15). A world thrown into chaos. A group project targeting the Jews. Leaders who enjoy self-congratulatory cocktails. Clueless, godless people unbothered by real pain they’ve caused

This is such a dark chapter with many places we could go. Remember a couple of weeks ago, I mentioned some goals for Esther (1) to see the invisible God, and also (2) to read for more than just simple morals [“Don’t be a bigot like Haman, stand up to bullies like Mordecai”].

Today is a good day for us to dig deep! I want to invite you to follow me through some passages that are going to shed so much light on Esther 3, and you might see some things you’ve never seen before.

Coming back to the idea of threads –  as we grow in learning the Bible, we begin to see patterns. They aren’t random or accidents. These patterns, events, characters show up repeatedly. As we see them, we get to know God better, and trust him more deeply, even as we live in our own Susa.

You may be new to Scripture. Sometimes it takes a lot of reading to see these threads emerge, but I want you to see one today.

I want to pull the thread of this evil man, who sets himself up as the enemy of God’s people. When you hear Haman described you should believe it

5he was filled with rage (at people not bowing down). 6When he learned of Mordecai’s ethnic identity, [his impulse is to kill every Jew]

8Haman singles out the Jews, “There is one ethnic group…It is not in the king’s best interest to tolerate them. 9…let an order be drawn up authorizing their destruction.

12…the order was written exactly as Haman commanded… 13… telling officials to destroy, kill, and annihilate all the Jewish people—young, old, women, children—and plunder their possessions on a single day.

You need to see that this isn’t just one random man in Susa who has some serious anger issues. You pull that thread further and you see what an enemy of God really looks like.

It’s worth being careful, not casual when we talk about God’s enemies, or evil people. We could easily throw people in a category just because we have a different opinion.

But yet, if you don’t have a category for God’s enemies or evil, does everything come down to well-meaning, naïve, misunderstood people? Wouldn’t you have to do clever gymnastics to really address the worst forms of evil?

Who is this evil man? Verse 1&10 describe Haman in a very specific way.

1Haman, son of Hammedatha the Agagite 10…Haman son of Hammedatha the Agagite, the enemy of the Jews.

“The Agagite.” I want to pull: THE AGAG THREAD (Esther 3). The thread of this enemy of God, targeting God’s people. Walk with me for a minute?

The last place you hear of Agag is in 1 Samuel (hundreds of years earlier).

1Samuel told Saul, “The Lord sent me to anoint you as king over his people Israel. Now, listen to the words of the Lord. 2This is what the Lord of Armies says: ‘I witnessed what the Amalekites did to the Israelites when they opposed them along the way as they were coming out of Egypt. 3Now go and attack the Amalekites and completely destroy everything they have. Do not spare them. Kill men and women, infants and nursing babies, oxen and sheep, camels and donkeys.’ ”

What would Saul do in this brutal conflict?

7Saul struck down the Amalekites from Havilah all the way to Shur, which is next to Egypt. 8He captured King Agag of Amalek alive, but he completely destroyed all the rest of the people with the sword. 9Saul and the troops spared Agag, and the best of the sheep, goats, cattle, and choice animals, as well as the young rams and the best of everything else. They were not willing to destroy them, but they did destroy all the worthless and unwanted things.

1 SAMUEL Saul was ordered to kill the enemy of God and his people. He doesn’t, he spares the king: King Agag. Samuel doesn’t hold back: “If you can’t obey the command of the Lord and deal with the sworn enemy of your people, you can’t be the king, and your days are numbered.” Next chapter, enter David, the true king.

Clearly he hadn’t killed them all, because in 1 Samuel 30, David has to deal with the Amalekites again. And ironically in 2 Sam 1, an Amalekite takes credit for ending Saul’s life

Can we keep pulling the thread? This conflict with Israel and Agag, or Israel and Amalek goes further. Years before that, you go to Judges 3,5,6,7,10 where Israel was constantly harassed by Amalek.

But what we read in 1 Samuel 15 goes hundreds of years back, all the way to EXODUS 17, very shortly after the Exodus of Israel from Egypt

8At Rephidim, Amalek came and fought against Israel.

13Joshua defeated Amalek and his army with the sword. 14The Lord then said to Moses, “Write this down on a scroll as a reminder and recite it to Joshua: I will completely blot out the memory of Amalek under heaven.” 15And Moses built an altar and named it, “The Lord Is My Banner.” 16He said, “Indeed, my hand is lifted up toward the Lord’s throne. The Lord will be at war with Amalek from generation to generation.”

Generational conflict. There was actually more going on

Deuteronomy 25:17–19 17“Remember what the Amalekites did to you on the journey after you left Egypt. 18They met you along the way and attacked all your stragglers from behind when you were tired and weary. They did not fear God. 19When the Lord your God gives you rest from all the enemies around you in the land the Lord your God is giving you to possess as an inheritance, blot out the memory of Amalek under heaven. Do not forget.

EXODUS/DEUTERONOMY  That was what was at stake in 1 Samuel. This was so significant that in Numbers there are prophecies

Numbers 24:7 7Water will flow from his [Jacob’s] buckets, and his seed will be by abundant water. His king will be greater than Agag, and his kingdom will be exalted.

Numbers 24:17 17I see him, but not now; I perceive him, but not near. A star will come from Jacob, and a scepter will arise from Israel.

Numbers 24:20 20Then Balaam saw Amalek and proclaimed his poem: Amalek was first among the nations, but his future is destruction.

NUMBERS  We pull this thread from Esther, to 1 Samuel, to Judges, to Deuteronomy, Numbers, to the Exodus. And even though it’s hundreds of years after the Exodus, and hundreds of miles away: Haman the Agagite. And it’s still the same story. And you’re not supposed to miss it.

Why spend so much time on this? What’s important about this thread?  Two burdens came to mind: As a pastor entrusted with your spiritual care, I don’t want you to be SURPRISED, and I don’t want you to be SCARED.

I don’t want for you to be SURPRISED. I guess we all know evil is real, dark, personal. Esther paints those strokes so well for us. It’s easy with all of our creature-comforts, technology, knowledge we’ve acquired to forget about our sworn spiritual enemy. This isn’t a fictional Moriarty or big bad wolf. If we’re reading our Bibles we can’t help but remember.

Revelation 12:9–10 9The great dragon… was thrown out—the ancient serpent, who is called the devil and Satan, the one who deceives the whole world. He was thrown to earth, and his angels with him. 10Then I heard a loud voice in heaven say, The salvation and the power and the kingdom of our God and the authority of his Christ have now come, because the accuser of our brothers and sisters, who accuses them before our God day and night, has been thrown down.

2 Corinthians 11:14 14Satan disguises himself as an angel of light. 1 Corinthians 5:5 – he’s bent on destroying our flesh

John 8:44 44The devil…was a murderer from the beginning and does not stand in the truth, because there is no truth in him. When he tells a lie, he speaks from his own nature, because he is a liar and the father of lies.

“Still our ancient foe, seeks to work us woe. His craft and power are great and armed with cruel hate. On earth is not his equal.”

Don’t be surprised: when we pull the thread of Haman, we recognize WE are in the world of a deceiver, accuser, destroyer, murderer, liar.

Tonight, we will join together as a church and pray. One of the reasons we pray is because we have a very real spiritual enemy, and we’ve grasped how real all of this is. We live in our own Susa.

We don’t need to have a complex about this, but we need to understand that often opposition to us is really opposition to our Lord.

Matthew 10:25 25If they called the head of the house ‘Beelzebul,’ how much more the members of his household!

John 15:18 18“If the world hates you, understand that it hated me before it hated you.

Romans 8:36 – Because of you we are being put to death all day long; we are counted as sheep to be slaughtered.

Matthew 5:11 – You are blessed when they insult you and persecute you and falsely say every kind of evil against you because of me.

We aren’t surprised. At least we shouldn’t be. I doubt everything that is tough or goes wrong in your life or sickness or temptation is an enemy attack. I doubt that every snide comment or petty slight is a direct attack from your spiritual adversaries. But our heads would be in the sand if we didn’t connect some of those dots!

God is doing something, and we have a real enemy.

We pull the thread, and realize maybe why it’s so dark, and what is really at stake as we struggle to stay loyal to Jesus.

I don’t want you to be surprised, but also, I don’t want you to be SCARED. You need awareness that being in a spiritual struggle is what it means to follow Jesus. But, you also need confidence. Confidence in what the Lord can do!

If you’re not yet a believer in Jesus, where do you go when the world goes dark, when everything that matters to you is threatened? What is your hope in life and death, your strategy for survival?

Do your best to think positive thoughts Do you find some means of escape (hobby or a substance) Grit it out and make something of myself

You were made for more than that! God loves you very much, and you were made for a very different destiny. Through Jesus, his perfect life, his sacrificial death, his powerful rising, you can see the truth, and rest solely in WHO HE IS!

I wanted you to see the Agag/Amalekite thread, because even when you’re like the people in Susa, when circumstances are super confused and they make you afraid, you have resources to draw upon.

“When darkness hides his face, I rest in His unchanging grace.”

And though this world with devils filled should threaten to undo us. We will not fear for God has willed his truth to triumph through us. The prince of Darkness grim, we tremble not for him. His rage we can endure, for lo his doom is sure. One little word shall fell him.

Grace comes when we listen to God speak. Hear these verses and let them settle in. There will be several references. Let these give you courage.

Psalm 24:8 8Who is this King of glory? The Lord, strong and mighty, the Lord, mighty in battle.

Colossians 2:15 – [Jesus Christ] disarmed the rulers and authorities and disgraced them publicly; he triumphed over them in him.

Revelation 12:9–10 9The great dragon was thrown out—the ancient serpent, who is called the devil and Satan, the one who deceives the whole world. He was thrown to earth, and his angels with him. 10Then I heard a loud voice in heaven say, The salvation and the power and the kingdom of our God and the authority of his Christ have now come, because the accuser of our brothers and sisters, who accuses them before our God day and night, has been thrown down.

1 John 5:4–5 4Everyone who has been born of God conquers the world…5Who is the one who conquers the world but the one who believes that Jesus is the Son of God?

1 John 4:4 4You are from God…the one who is in you is greater than the one who is in the world.

Does that deal with your fear? Does that make you give thanks?

2 Corinthians 2:14 14Thanks be to God, who always leads us in Christ’s triumphal procession.

1 Corinthians 15:57 57Thanks be to God, who gives us the victory through our Lord Jesus Christ!

2 Corinthians 10:4–5 4The weapons of our warfare are powerful through God for the demolition of strongholds. We demolish arguments 5and every proud thing that is raised up against the knowledge of God, and we take every thought captive to obey Christ.

Romans 8:37 37We are more than conquerors through him who loved us.

Romans 16:20 20The God of peace will soon crush Satan under your feet.

So church, hear these words.

Ephesians 6:10 10Be strengthened by the Lord and by his vast strength.

Joshua 1:9 9Be strong and courageous. Do not be afraid or discouraged, for the Lord your God is with you wherever you go.”

Philippians 1:28 28 [Don’t be] frightened in any way by your opponents.

Isaiah 26:4 4Trust in the Lord forever, because in the Lord, the Lord himself, is an everlasting rock!

PRAYER

Father, You’ve done everything that’s needed to prepare us for spiritual battle. Help us not to be surprised when living for you, receiving your grace, resting in who you are seems harder rather than easier. Help us watch and pray. Give us alertness.

And fill us with courage from Jesus through your Spirit. When we don’t see a way, when we only can envision nightmare scenarios, when what matters to us is threatened, forgive us when we melt down, but forgive us also when we double down on our own schemes and our own strength. Make us the kinds of women and men who don’t fear because we know you are with us.

We lift our eyes. We know where our help comes from. Amen.

<><><><><>

8.9.2026  Brainerd Baptist Church