COMPLETE IN CHRIST Mapping Your Story on to His COLOSSIANS 3:1-11

Introduction: It’s a sick feeling…you’ve spent a lot of time studying for an exam. You’re ready. You think you are. But, as you take the exam, you realize, “Oh no! I spent way too much time studying the wrong thing. I was focused on the wrong thing.” Nothing really you can do in that moment.

Challenge us a bit today, and especially talk with Christians

If you’re not yet there (1) you’re always welcome here, (2) this actually is such a good Sunday to explore, because we’re going to drill down on the Christian life. Being a Christian is not a voting box you check

One thing I’ve seen is that as a Christian, it becomes really easy to focus on Where does Jesus fit into the major moments of the story I am writing with my life? I get that. That’s better than being a functional atheist where God has no part in your life.

But I want to challenge you that there’s something better than that: Where do I find my place in the major moments of the big story Jesus is writing?

If you can turn a corner, it could transform your life. Things that are stuck now, might look different in a few weeks, months. We read this:

2:6–7 6So then, just as you have received Christ Jesus as Lord, continue to walk in him, 7being rooted and built up in him and established in the faith, just as you were taught, and overflowing with gratitude.

What does that life look like? And what are some of the major moments of the story of Jesus. Let me read our text for today.

3:1–4 1So if you have been raised with Christ, seek the things above, where Christ is, seated at the right hand of God. 2Set your minds on things above, not on earthly things. 3For you died, and your life is hidden with Christ in God. 4When Christ, who is your life, appears, then you also will appear with him in glory.

You saw some glimpses of what I am calling major moments in the work of Jesus, but for me it’s helpful to map it out, and I apologize in advance for the homemade artwork. You’ll go home saying “Our pastor really tried, bless his heart.”

Christ DIED and was BURIED

Colossians is filled with reminders that Jesus Christ died: his blood shed on the cross (1:20), his physical body experienced death (1:22), the cross (2:14).  He also was buried – you were buried with him (2:12)

Jesus’ death consumes a lot of Scripture. Lots of verses cover the 24 hours leading up to where Jesus bled out, breathed his last and died. The NT comes back to it (John, Jude, Peter, Paul, Hebrews). Jesus died and was buried. That’s a major moment.

But, then Christ was RAISED/and is seated at the right hand of God

3:1 – Christ is seated at the right hand of God. 1:18 – He is the firstborn from the dead. 2:12 – God raised Jesus from the dead. 2:15 – God triumphed over (evil powers in the resurrection of Jesus).

Seated at the right hand is a position of authority and power, which Jesus uses for good, for the benefit of His people. Unquestioned authority, real power, and he executes a good plan. Major moment

But, we also could use the word HIDDEN, for now as a mystery that’s slowly being revealed, we don’t see him. The world doesn’t fully recognize who He is. Every knee hasn’t bowed (yet!). For now, Christ is hidden.

But, one day Christ will APPEAR

3:4– When Christ who is your life appears (in glory)...

This creates such a dividing line. There is everlasting joy, life, everything you would ever have imagined it could be and a million times more.

And we also know there will be judgment – God’s wrath poured out on those who chose a path of disobedience, those who were so full of themselves, they didn’t really think they ever needed some sort of the “big guy upstairs.”

That’s such a turning point, every knee bows (voluntarily/involuntarily), and everything’s different and permanent on the other side of that appearing.

Those are some major events of the life of Jesus. I doubt a lot of that is new, but let’s just take a moment and appreciate that.

I’d like to think that these events are like the…Story that never gets old, food that’s always delicious, friend you always want to see, the panorama that’s always breathtaking

but I can imagine lots of days where the stress of life, the difficulties you face, pressure, opportunities and pulls, temptations could tend to put this in one of those drawers or closets of things that’s nice to have if you need it. IF being the operative word.

Still, if we are Christians I can’t imagine one day of the rest of our lives where these major moments of Jesus wouldn’t really matter to us.

As I said at the beginning, it’s easy to get so much of this backwards. It’s so easy to just start with ME: How does Jesus fit into the timeline of my life (schooling, career, family, friends, hobbies, health)?

Colossians (and many other places in Scripture) goes the exact opposite direction. Invites us to have a kingdom perspective

The way your roots of faith go deeper, the way your life gets built up, your life becomes more settled is by mapping your life on to those major events in the life of Jesus. I want to help you do that.

Because of God’s mercy and grace and through your faith, for so many of you, these aren’t just significant moments in a powerful story, but it’s part of you and part of your story.

So, it’s time to map what has happened and what will happen to and for those who are trusting in, relying on Jesus Christ. Let’s go through the timeline of the major moments again.

Remember Christ died and was buried, but for the church, you died with Christ and were buried with Him

2:20 – If you died with Christ…, why do you live as if you still belonged to the world? 3:3 – For you died.

Obviously you’re still here physically, but something of the old you has been put away. The you that was self-destructive, and could never live up to what you should be. The cross is now your story. And so is Christ’s burial. You are on the other side of it.

2:11–12 the body of (your sinful) flesh has been put off by Christ 12when you were buried with him in baptism.

When Christ was buried, your old self was buried. So, play that out with a 5th grader who receives Jesus. She has died with Christ, is buried with him. She will never have to work off debt. Not then, but not ever. The same for the 35 year old with maybe more baggage, more pain, more scar tissue..

It’s not just that an old self has died. We can say more, you have been raised with Christ

3:1 – So if you have been raised with Christ, seek the things above, where Christ is, seated at the right hand of God.

2:12-13 12you were raised with him through faith…13When you were dead in trespasses, he made you alive with him and forgave us all our trespasses.

He made you alive. As part of this, your enemies are defeated (triumphed over). This is a permanent arrangement. God’s work in your life going forward is filled with life, not death. It doesn’t go in reverse.

Now, your life is hidden with Christ.  There are going to be some invisible aspects of your life with Christ.

3:3 – For you died, and your life is hidden with Christ in God.

I can’t just look at you and see the difference immediately. That’s okay

strength in suffering – outside, your body is falling apart slow progress in attitude, mindset, but progress is being made security, Lord is your shepherd, rock, helper [not just going through motions, playing games]

You are being renewed! WOW that is going on right now for an 80 year old who has walked with Christ for a long time, and the brand new Christian.

And then one day, those who know Jesus will appear with Christ.

3:4 – When Christ, who is your life, appears, then you also will appear with him in glory.

New body (glorified one), new heavens, new earth. Perfected, complete, and totally visible. There will be dimensions we are unaware of right now

It’s so valuable to just sit in that. It’s time to map your life onto THAT!

contemplate the love He has for you appreciate the specific design he must have for your life be grateful the patience he has in getting you there believe the plans for eternity that he has (he’s worked the plan so far) rest in the lengths to which he has gone to secure you be filled with hope for what fullness and wholeness will look like

Maybe you’re thinking “That’s amazing, that’s beautiful, I needed that correction, I understand that more clearly.” But I don’t live in heaven. I live here. At its best, life gets complicated and stressful, at worst, it’s a real mess that I have trouble navigating.

Paul isn’t sugar coating how you should live. He cares about your decisions, actions, attitudes, goals, desires.

Still, we have these high-point moments of a very real story, but what if the STORY becomes a STRATEGY, our gospel-filled strategy (when we seek the above-things, set your mind there, that’s action oriented). These are like travel-ready bags you pack and carry on your way. Settle in and think through how that might work.

I have died and been buried with Christ, so I will make every effort to put some things to death

3:5–7 5Therefore, put to death what belongs to your earthly nature: sexual immorality, impurity, lust, evil desire, and greed, which is idolatry. 6Because of these, God’s wrath is coming upon the disobedient, 7and you once walked in these things when you were living in them.

What aspects of death do you want to live in? We were buried, things like immorality, impurity, evil desires need to be choked off. My past without Christ full of dead ends.

Did you hear about God’s wrath: (1) it’s leveraged on those who have disobeyed, and (2) the real-time relief is that’s in our past.

What should I be putting to death, real-time, real life? How do we live in a world where we’re bombarded with advertisements that seem to promote the very things we’re supposed to be putting to death?

If something like social media starts regularly fueling covetousness and greed, what could change? Do you need to put something to death?

Are explicit songs or things that you stream really that glorify lust are a part of your new life in Christ or something you should put to death

the language, the jokes, taking it too far physically when you aren’t married, are they something that should be buried?

Friend that was 20, you aren’t bound to things that will make your life worse in the end

Accountability, vulnerable conversations, confession, rhythms that make it harder to sin? Not just rule keeping, but sin-killing.

I have been made alive with Christ, so I will make every effort to put away some things

3:8–11 8But now, put away all the following: anger, wrath, malice, slander, and filthy language from your mouth. 9Do not lie to one another, since you have put off the old self with its practices 10and have put on the new self. You are being renewed in knowledge according to the image of your Creator.

We have been made alive, live a new life, put away anything that doesn’t match where Jesus is.  What about your new life makes the most sense? Where do we do deep heartwork and repentance of things like anger and malice? How can you get control of your mouth, what strategies would be useful to help remember where you really live, and who really is king.

11In Christ there is not Greek and Jew, circumcision and uncircumcision, barbarian, Scythian, slave and free; but Christ is all and in all.

Some paraphrases I found: Christ is all that matters, and he lives in all of us. From now on everyone is defined by Christ and everyone is included in Christ. The king is everything and in everything!

Are there things that make sense with you having been raised to walk a new life with Jesus Christ who is King of Kings?

You’re ready for accountability strategies for your addictive behaviors. You can think through the rhythms, habits of your life, what cultivates a deeper appreciation for where you live now, who you are now.

if your time is too self-focused, what matches the new life of being raised with where Jesus is?

A 50-yr old friend, you have freedom to pursue so many things in love for God and love for neighbor. You are free to please God.

My life is hidden with Christ and one day I will appear with Him, so I will make every effort to put on some things. That’s where we’re headed next week, but what comfort does that bring!

Does that help you face your body image issues?

The struggles with infertility that come with their own kind of pain

The loneliness you feel, can you talk about that with the Lord?

I am yours, Lord. It doesn’t look like it now, because things are hidden, and being slowly revealed, but one day, it will change.

When Jesus finally appears, it will be all about glory, and you will be right there, appearing exactly how you were designed to be…

Knowing you have human limitations, what’s on the table for you to give to the Lord, knowing that day is coming?

What about your insecurities (of needing to be first or best or just plain noticed, and not look like an idiot)

Can you stare down your comparison tendencies, knowing that appearing with Christ in glory is your end picture?

And what happens where you’re facing end-of-life issues, when you hear stage-4, or inoperable, or there aren’t any options.

I hope the full picture helps a little, but what I know can change you is not “trying to squeeze Jesus into your life.” But, when every moment of your  life (big, small, life-altering, mundane) propels you toward the major moments of His life.

1. Ask for the Lord’s help in processing life this way

2. Open your eyes, take real stuff, and start running it through the map that matters.

Let’s end with Jesus

3:1–4 So if you have been raised with Christ, seek the things above, where Christ is, seated at the right hand of God. Set your minds on things above, not on earthly things. For you died, and your life is hidden with Christ in God. When Christ, who is your life, appears, then you also will appear with him in glory.

<><><><><>

5.3.2026  Brainerd Baptist Church