COMPLETE IN CHRISTTHE LIMITS OF LEGALISMCOLOSSIANS 2:16-23

If you’ve been with us over the past few weeks, we have been working our way through the letter to the church at Colossae. We were invited into a serious conversation last week, where Paul warned a church about being deceived by philosophies, and being taken captive spiritually.Read Colossians 2:16-23 then [SERIES SLIDE]

There’s a lot there. It’s a passage that gets interesting to teach, because on one hand, in 20 years of being a lead pastor:

I’ve never been in church that had an angel worship crisisA life group has never split over new moon observances

However, when I hear rules/judging, regulations/condemning, I HAVE heard

the really spiritual people _____,_____,_____ (ever growing lists)___,____,____ are things you should never doA real Christian better be doing _____,_____,_____I can’t believe others call themselves Christians and _____,_____,____

That’s very familiar territory for us individually, and even as a church.

In church environment like ours, I don’t think anyone would ever suggest, follow all the rules, you get to heaven.

But using a lot of rules/regulations to manage your relationship with God on your way to the new heavens/earth. That’s pretty common. Which is why we need to talk about legalism.

I’m sure there are people out there who claim to be Christians and then do whatever they feel like.

But, I HAVE met people who live here: the target of this Scripture is the person who DOES care, wants to grow, fight sin, have a relationship with Jesus, but could get deceived or enslaved by LEGALISM.

If we use a term like legalism, it’s wise to narrow it. It’s too easy to broadbrush, anything that I don’t want to do (or think is a bit much), I dismiss as legalism.

In what we just read = Food/drink, festival, new moon, Sabbath (16); ascetic practices (18); Don’t handle, don’t taste, don’t touch (21); commands, doctrines, regulations – demands things from you

Using a lot of rules/regulations to manage a relationship with God. In some ways, it’s starting with Jesus, but adding things from there. That’s pretty common. Which is why we need to think pretty carefully.

In communities or movements, strong personalities can have a big influence (write well, speak well, have an authoritative pull).

Legalism comes packaged in different ways. Formal/informal, rules are sometimes written and sometimes go unwritten:

Sometimes the legalism is a result of

Strict upbringing (family, military?)Personality (lists, rules, structures, rituals)Old school (We used to ___. OR Back in the good ole days)

But, make no mistake, there is also a new school (2026) set of rules (sound a bit more hip, trendy), travel in the self-help or even religious space, give you 12 rules for life; buy into steps or practices, home, personal life

Not every list, rule, regulation is a bad thing at all, as a matter of fact, many of them can be really helpful. Don’t mishear me.

So we need to do the hard work of looking at the limits of legalism.

Let’s start with What is attractive about legalism? What’s the appeal?

MEASUREMENT – we want to “keep track”  of our walk with God

Observances like festivals/Sabbath; food/drink; don’t do that (put it on a spreadsheet or a chart and track it); you either have or you haven’t

That’s helpful in a lot of things: calories (not fun), reps, number of days

Shawna growing up, youth group kept track of: points for the # of times for devotions, prayers, bible memory; youth group kept track

It’s like a scoreboard, and those are compelling (# of goals, points, etc.)

alongside that, it’s attractive to measure PROGRESS – we want to be in a position  to assess our growth/decline

If you’re convinced that the rules/regulations can take you deeper, higher, further, make us better; it’s like you will be able to say: “I was here, but as I have kept track, the scoreboard looks better now.”

We can magnify CONTRAST – we want to be able  to highlight differences

If we are NOT supposed to do a bunch of things, then this helps us see who does and who doesn’t

Or, If it’s all about experience/visions (18) – these people have had the experience, those have not. We set up and identify different camps.

We also function by  MOTIVATION – we feel the need for something  strong and sufficient to keep us in line

Regulations (20), commands/doctrines (22); has the power to condemn, something you submit to

It feels like that could be really powerful. There will always be rule-breakers, but if we have something serious hanging over us, this helps us keep doing right? Guilt, fear – these are the tools that can really get the job done of keeping everyone in line

If you feel like life is a mess, this presents itself as potentially really helpful. Does that make sense? And if we’re in a culture that functions like this, or we have a compelling teacher (influencer/author/creator) drilling down here, we are drawn in.

Even as we list a bunch of attractive things…

Why does trying to manage our relationship with God through lists of rules BREAK DOWN so often? What ends up breaking down?

For any upsides, the context here is one of not being deceived, enslaved, judged, condemned. There are some serious issues.

Some things are just hard to quantify or measure: even if we could measure practices, there will still be qualities like humility, kindness, joy, peace, patience (all seem like important things)

trust, dependence, reliance, allegiance, devotion and all your heart, soul, strength (hard to measure)

1-2 markers (need more than that), fake something on the outside (whole problem in the prophets of the Bible)

Spiritual maturity/progress is complicated: you should know that a lot of your Christian life will be one step forward, two back, two forward.

breakthrough in one area, deeper issues in another; things that maybe gnaw over time, things that make a big splash

We are meant to grow, and we will, but that’s just not easy to track (even if you can tell progress over a year or a decade)

When we notice the contrast, pride so easily creeps in: we judge, we condemn; we can be inflated by empty notions of our unspiritual mind (18)

Contrast often sounds like the Pharisee “God, I thank you that I am not like the sinner.” Or…God, I thank you that I am not a Pharisee

How could they, you would think they _______, they say they love God, but then they _______. We’re the standard, judge, jury, executioner.

Rules don’t and can’t. They aren’t an adequate motivation to curb our sinful flesh: As you read, you realize it appears on the surface like it could

Give access to a deeper experience with God, give some growth you otherwise might not have, curb some of our sinful self-indulgence

It’s regulating what is passing away (22),  it’s not of any value in curbing self-indulgence (certainly not long term)

anger management, porn, spending too much, bitterness, drinking, gossiping, laziness, judgmentalism (worst version of yourself)

I can see where some rigid practices could be training wheels for a season, maybe could jumpstart some things. But we need more, especially if we want to walk with Jesus.

And that’s the main breakdown, right?  My real issue with legalism, is that it backgrounds Jesus. He inadvertently ends up playing a supporting role, if any role at all.

From Colossians, we’ve already seen he is before all things, he’s the head and we’re connected/united to him, he holds everything together, and just as we received Christ, we’re supposed to continue to walk in him, and legalism does this big bypass around Him and His grace.

This goes beyond us individually. A Jesus-in-the-background, grace-less culture and community can develop at any church. And it can be so unhealthy and detrimental spiritually.

There is a better path forward and a fresh way to walk (and even recover from legalism). I remember reading a book called Grace Awakening by Charles Swindoll. I like that terminology, and I want to say there is a shift.

So, I believe this is what chapter 3 is all about (and that’s next week), but I want to start today. Because just saying, “try really hard not to be a legalist” seems less than helpful.

How can we make progress, how do we have access to a deep walk with the Lord, how can we experience growth from God?

We don’t need a new list, a new set of rules/regulations.

I’ve had to unlearn, learn, relearn, relearn some more. Let me try to use a few words to encapsulate a “grace awakening shift.”

Jesus enjoys transforming us from the inside out

we don’t have to give up the righteous, holy desire that the sin inside us be put in check. We never have to give in to living as a slave to our flesh. We know we need help.

AND Jesus is meant to be the center/source/goal of that help. Just as we received him, we walk IN HIM, rooted and built up IN HIM (2:6-7)

He enjoys doing that work. For us, with jobs there’s the “have-to” work and the “get-to” work. You growing into who you were meant to be, being made new, brings great satisfaction.

You are free from carrying the heavy load of caring about this alone. He is large and in charge. He erases guilty records, He disarms your spiritual enemies. He can get this done. He will see this through.

And for the record, being transformed is not one-size-fits-all. The pace, progress, priority areas will likely all look different for us. That’s okay. The Holy Spirit can handle that.

If you need Jesus less than you used to,  something has gone wrong.

We relearn some things, because that isn’t the way physical maturity works. Growing up means moving toward a place where someday you don’t need your parents to hold you, feed you, decide everything for you, provide for you. It’s maturity as you move more and more on your own.

What sounds humanly speaking as immature, in the kingdom of God is deeper maturity. Lord help us. That’s why it’s a big deal that commands and doctrines are human (22), the religion is self-made, it’s DIY (23). That means you need Jesus LESS. Which means you did it wrong.

The Christian life is a based on a deep connection with Jesus. You don’t want shadows, you want the substance (17). You want your life to be holding on to the spiritual HEAD of our body (Jesus), with no disconnect (19). You want your growth to come from GOD (19)

This is always been his big plan: rather than sending us down our own road to figure it out, “Let’s grow with you and me walking together”

let’s walk through the valley of the shadow of death together (it will never sound like, you do it by yourself this time)

I can do all things through Christ who gives me strength will literally never morph to I’ve progressed to where I can do all things through self-reliance

The promise of the great commission isn’t I am with you for as long as you need me, but soon you’ll just launch out on your own

Giving you the armor of God described in Eph 6 isn’t a starter kit, until you don’t need it anymore, it’s your spiritual lifeblood

Can you see how a change in perspective is really necessary?

let’s talk about this more next week, but a big piece of this changeLove goes further/deeper as a motivator than fear or guilt ever could.

I lived near Philly for a while. I learned that Philly Airport TSA could provoke fear, and that gets things done. But let’s just say it wasn’t a relationship of trust and growth (you might have had supervisors, teachers, coaches or even people at church function with fear like that). It doesn’t really move the heart. You have to know someone is FOR YOU.

Real relationships need more. Colossians 1-2 beats the drum of cross/resurrection. Of course that shows God’s power, but it’s a deep display of LOVE. Love that brings assurance, reconciliation, forgiveness, hope, understanding/wisdom. He loves you. He loves me.

Because God’s love is so active, that is the foundation that can drive everything in our lives. LOVE so amazing, so divine, demands my soul, my life, my all

Imagine what that does in an individual, and imagine the culture that builds.

Verse 23 is a warning. Let’s not ever think that if we got hard core enough about religious practices, beat people down, find all sorts of hard things that are virtually impossible to keep up, then we might get somewhere, we could make idiots like Curtis behave. That never works.

But, you know as well as I do there are people who earn our respect and devotion because we know they are FOR us (they see something in us that we can’t even see, loved, believed, they opened doors)

I would run through a brick wall, write thank you cards years later, their name comes up almost in reverence. I wouldn’t be here without them. If I’ve been motivated to make any progress or see any long-term growth, it’s been because of love.

That’s why I am positive that a massive switch could come by just shifting our focus on the words FROM and FOR!  We could pile on fear and guilt as we talk about what God demands FROM us. We could quantify things, make lists and necessary practices.

Bible reading, prayer, church attendance, service, evangelism, giving

Or we can see what God in his deep love wants FOR US (changes things)

Bible – for us – know his will/mind/character/planPrayer – for us – relationship of communication,Church – for us – gathered with a group (rather than isolated),Service – for us – using your gifts to serve others,Gospel sharing – finding a role in spreading the best news ever,Giving – being so free from the love of money that you can invest.

That changes things radically! From goes to for, and love keeps driving.

CONCLUSION: We have more that we can and need to talk through. But, today we can end where we should.

not filling out a chart of performance

Working through an academic exercise, where we take a quiz to make sure we got it all

Instead of that, we’re going to observe the Lord’s Supper. We settle our hearts, we recognize our dependence on Him doing for us what we couldn’t do on our own, and we are once again going to taste and see that the Lord is good, and be assured of His deep, unchanging love.

<><><><><>

4.26.2026    Brainerd Baptist Church